Critics of the Heher commission’s report on tertiary education funding reform say the proposals rely unrealistically on the goodwill of private banks. The report does not address key issues such as the interest rates the banks will charge under his proposal, which would make them the single funding mechanism for university education, they say. It simply states that the average interest rates charged now by the banks are between prime (currently 10.25% for secured loans, which are backed by a guarantee) and prime plus at 6% for unsecured loans. Judge Jonathan Heher admitted in an interview with the Mail & Guardian that his proposal relies to some extent on the goodwill of the banks. He said interest rates were purposely left out of the report because these will have to be negotiated with the banks “on the basis that the banks have a social responsibility and that they were under no risk whatsoever”. Heher has proposed an income-contingent loan scheme, in which banks provide government-guaranteed loans, which would mean the banks would not be at risk should students default, and the South African Revenue Service (Sars) would act as a loan collection agent.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.