THE READING LIST Ayòbámi Adébáyò: Stay With Me. A woman named Yejide suffers at the hands of her husband’s pride and her in-laws expectations. Adébáyò’s debut has managed to produce a heart-warming read that contrasts the strength of a woman’s will with the fragility of manhood.  Although the protagonist’s plight left me deeply saddened all through the week, it’s a read I would encourage.
(ZH) Junot Diaz: The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao. The reasons this phenomenal novel won the Pulitzer prize for fiction are hurled at you from the first page to the bitter last.  Diaz’s bodaciously cheeky prose, broken by immersive footnotes about historical characters, makes for a meal made for rapid devouring. He gives the reader full citizenship of the world and lives of our leading Dominican family, whose lives oscillate between Paterson, New Jersey, and their home country of the Dominican Republic. It’s written in English, with Spanish placed unapologetically and oh so deliciously into the sentences. I’m in bleeding love. (MB) THE PLAY LIST Kaytranada featuring Anderson Paak: Glowed Up. My unofficial Afropunk countdown has begun. Everything on my playlist has to psych me up for the occasion. So, who better to start this with than Anderson Paak and Kaytranada to keep me going this week as I fantasise about the glow-up I’m plotting for the festival? (ZH) Ask Me Another — an NPR Podcast of epic nerdery. Think of your favourite quiz show and add the quirkiest of references then forget about everything you thought you knew about the art of trivia.  This is a brilliant, interactive podcast in which contestants win nothing but a Rubik’s cube because the questions, the themes, the guests and the depth of nerdery are too much not to love.  The latest episode mashes old films and new social media platforms, where the first answer (spoiler alert) of the hour-long programme’s first quiz ends up being Scarfacebook.  You will either love it or hate it.  Be warned that it’s deeply American but great for driving. (MB) The Lists were compiled by Friday editor Milisuthando Bongela and intern Zaza Hlalethwa