Dear Fees Commission, We regret to inform you that your 570-page manuscript, titled Commission of Inquiry into Higher Education and Training, will not be considered for publication as a hardcover at this time. Stories — in their current form — consist of a beginning, a middle and an end, with a hero, or protagonist, undergoing some sort of change to come to some sort of deep insight. Your story (although with a considerable beginning and oversized middle) has, at a total length of a gazillion words, no end and is bereft of heroes, plots, insights and twists of any kind. Furthermore, in addition to a moral lesson, and despite the trials and tribulations of the hero, contemporary stories have happy endings — so as to leave readers with the joyful notion that everything is okay, and will be as long as they lose themselves in fiction. The manuscript you sent us (bar, perhaps, mention of a R99-billion surplus) brought us, and by extension our readers, no joy. We were also appalled by your habit of blatantly stating the obvious (and there is no other way of putting this) to pad a horribly deficient document. We all know that everyone has a right to further education and that the state has a constitutional duty to realise this. There is no need whatsoever to acknowledge it, and even less so in the opening stanza of the manuscript. A good tip to remember is that the readability of a novel hinges on what the reader does not know and the author’s expert ability to reveal the unknown in a slow and tantalising drip that forces said reader to keep turning the page. We also know that the state does not have the funds to provide free higher education and training.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.