Social grant payments will proceed smoothly in April 2018 and in compliance with a Constitutional Court order that the system of payment must be legalised, Minister in the Presidency Jeff Radebe assured Parliament this week. But a report by a group of experts set up by the Constitutional Court after both government and Parliament failed on that score in 2017 — and after similar assurances from Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini last November, which proved false — says otherwise. Repeated failures to take decisions and action since March “make a smooth transition by 1 April 2018 virtually impossible”, the court’s experts warned last week. As a result, the suspension of public finance laws under which grants are currently being paid may have to continue beyond that April deadline, and much-maligned outsourced partner Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) will probably have to retain some involvement in the process too. Radebe heads up an interministerial committee on social security that was hastily assembled in the face of the 2017 grants payments crisis. Yet that committee is “without any statutory or other formal functions or powers”, the expert panel said.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.