“You’ve gained SO much weight, girl! You’re fat now and it’s not a good look, hey.” “With all this weight, we can no longer see your beauty. What a shame.” “Ha ah Mashadi, what have you been eating? Please don’t gain any more because it doesn’t suit you.” These are a few of the unsolicited comments that I’ve had to listen to ever since I put on weight. At the forefront of this abuse — yes, serious emotional abuse — are family members (such as that aunt who has had sinus issues from years of using Ntsu Black snuff), neighbours, “friends”, acquaintances (like the woman who goes to the stokvel with your mother and has proclaimed herself your honorary aunt) and — my personal favourites — those people who last saw you as a child but still think it’s okay to comment on your weight as if you weren’t allowed to grow up and look different. Just to clarify, I have definitely gained weight over the past few years, but best believe me when I say that I do not need a walking, talking, “minding everyone else’s business but their own” mirror.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.