Justice has emerged victorious. Judge Billy Mothle concluded on October 12 in the high court in Pretoria that Ahmed Timol—who died after “falling” from the 10th floor of John Vorster Square police building in Johannesburg — was murdered in 1971 by security branch personnel who first systematically tortured and then pushed him to his death. The court overturned the findings of an inquest conducted at the time, which concluded the death to be the result of suicide — a reflection of the great lengths to which the security branch went to cover their tracks and hide the truth. The poem, In Detention, by Chris van Wyk comes to mind as a literary depiction of this almost farcical attempt at spindoctoring by the apartheid state. Decades later the Timol family reopened the inquest in an attempt to uncover the truth and achieve, finally, some form of closure to their loss and resolution of the trauma of decades of secrecy, unanswered questions and deceit. The Timols’ story prior to the re-opening of the inquest is not unlike that of many other families in South Africa.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.