In the documentary film The People vs Patriarchy, one would have hoped that the fast-paced introduction to the film was not a précis for its general tone and scope. Unfortunately, in many ways it is. So, even as musician and actor Nakhane Touré distinctly outlines the spectre of Christianity as the overriding rationale for persisting patriarchy, this perspective is soon drowned out by the overall tone of the film — which seemingly posits patriarchy as a primarily black phenomenon. The People vs Patriarchy, directed by Lebogang Rasethaba and produced by Jasmyn Asvat, is the second in MTV Base’s series of films looking at urgent South African sociopolitical issues, with the first one being The People vs The Rainbow Nation. Though it uses a similar narration-free format and meticulously stitched-together visuals, this film’s marked departure is the lack of narrative profiles — making it more talk-driven than its predecessor. Although, mostly visually, some effort is made to represent patriarchy as a globally occurring, power-related malaise, the context we are presented with in the intro is mostly that of the Western world.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.