Having accused him and the Eskom board of conspiring to commit fraud, Public Enterprises Minister Lynne Brown is now afraid to be cross-examined, former Eskom chief executive Brian Molefe suggested on Thursday. There is perhaps something lurking behind that, Molefe s advocate Noel Graves told the labour court in Johannesburg on Thursday. Molefe dramatically asked the court, which he approached to have his firing by Eskom overturned, to instead order that his complaint be taken to arbitration but arbitration open to the media, with the participation of the Democratic Alliance and the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) and where Brown would be required to take the stand. She is perhaps a little concerned about having to testify, and she will have to testify, Graves said of Brown s opposition to that proposal. In previous written arguments Molefe until recently an ANC MP accused the ANC of political interference in having him fired. The ruling party had usurped Brown s powers, he said, and she had followed the ANC s orders when she fired him. In new written arguments submitted on Thursday, Molefe s team tore into Brown, saying that her subsequent actions suggests a degree of opportunism and expedience which ill becomes a member of the executive of this country . Brown, Molefe s legal team argued, has accused Molefe and the Eskom board of committing fraud. This arose from the farcical series of events in which Molefe appeared to resign from Eskom but apparently took early retirement, when actually he was on unpaid leave while serving in Parliament, thinking he was a pensioner. If this [fraud] is truly the minister s opinion, then she would be expected to want this to be determined properly and fully through the leading of oral evidence, Molefe s written argument reads. When, on Brown s orders, Molefe was fired from Eskom in early June after his supposed retirement had been revoked he approached the labour court seeking reinstatement. The DA and EFF, both of which had already gone to the high court in Pretoria to argue against the revocation of his supposed retirement, on Tuesday gained the right to intervene in Molefe s labour court application. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.