An article in the Mail &amp; Guardian last week, Architects take on bully council , attempted to dig deeper into a series of allegations levelled by a group of architects, known as A4C, against the South African Council for the Architectural Profession (Sacap). The article failed to cite evidence for the claims.Sacap also takes issue with lack of inclusion and comment by the department of public works and the Council for the Built Environment. Both bodies (together with Sacap) are mandated by Acts of Parliament to deliver resolutions to critical issues mistakenly and solely levelled against Sacap. Sacap president Yashaen Luckan says: The resistance to transformation by the old guard has simply been disguised as whistle-blowing . We have nothing to hide, our books are open. The unfortunate misunderstanding among some professionals regarding the council s mandates and its statutory limitations is being exploited by the A4C, who are calling into question our ethics, capabilities and motivations with defamatory, slanderous allegations. They re all unsubstantiated, lacking prima facie evidence. Sacap s response to each allegation and demand was published on our website in March. In the M&amp;G article, members of A4C reasserted the allegations. We will address those, but first the broader context. The Architectural Professions Act of 2000 replaced the Architects Act of 1970, which only recognised professional architects. Thus representation on the register of professionals reflects more than 80% of professional architects as white and predominantly male.The new Act recognised that the vast majority of those doing architectural work, and from historically disadvantaged backgrounds, were not given the opportunity of architectural education and professional registration. This changed the profession and its education. Draughtspersons, technologists and senior technologists were now afforded professional registration. The register of architectural professionals soon changed accordingly. This marked the beginning of resistance from a number of professional architects who felt their work would not be protected and their fees would be threatened. The reasons for the withdrawal of the Identity of Work framework and the professional fees guidelines are publicly documented, yet A4C chooses to blame Sacap for not serving the interests of the profession.Sacap has assumed an ethical responsibility for working with the government to address past imbalances and transform the built environment. It has a public protection mandate, and holds registered persons accountable for rule 2.1 of Sacap s code of professional conduct, which states that a Sacap registrant may only perform such work as they are professionally qualified and competent to undertake, according to their registration category.The council undertook to reinstate the recognition of prior learning (RPL), a key transformation driver, which had previously been put on hold. Recognising prior learning affords those who acquired skills and knowledge through experience an opportunity to achieve the status of a higher professional registration category. They are predominantly historically disadvantaged people. Sacap is proud to have designed a new RPL online system (under the guidance of its president, whose PhD focused on transformation of architectural education), which has recently been implemented. Responses from historically ignored people and their representative voluntary associations has been overwhelmingly positive. But resistance from the old guard , through A4C (not an official voice of the profession), has risen to new heights. Several members of the previous board, who are signatories to the A4C petition, were responsible for the anti-transformative moratorium regarding the recognition of prior learning. Those resisting transformation hope to replace the current council and get the professional gatekeepers back on to it. On specific inaccuracies in the article: The subcommittee of council does not have the requisite capacity to undertake a benchmarking excersise, nor the requisite authorisation to get involved in the minutiae of a skills audit. Its function is to review, test and approve or disapprove the final report and its recommendations.Sacap continues to invite all its stakeholders to participate in Sacap s open-door policy and vision.The M&amp;G apologises for errors of fact in last week s article, and for failing to pursue adequate responses to claims made