 My name is Stella, so being Stella means being a star and leading other stars. So me hanging around these guys shows that I am also a star and for a star to shine, it needs other stars.I had been living in Jo burg for a few years when some friends in the music industry said I could feature in the One of a Kind music video with [Nigerian musician] Davido. At first I couldn t believe it, it was so exciting.I arrived at a park in Bryanston with a few other dancers just before 6am on a Wednesday. The first part of the shoot was a sunrise scene, so we had to be there early. I was so surprised because Davido was on time as well. He arrived and we spoke a little bit; he s a very chilled guy. I remember thinking I used to see this guy on TV and the best part is that now I m doing a video with him.He was the latest famous person I worked with since meeting [Nigerian musicians] D Banj and Wizkid. Somehow I just happen to run into these guys. But just to see Davido was, wow! Just to be close to him, taking a photo with him &hellip; was wow! Seeing him doing his rap and his Nigerian dance style, ahhh it really was amazing.The park had these palm trees, so it made the video look like a tropical island location and everyone was dressed in bright colours and the mood was, like, it s festive. But it was just here in Jo burg.There was one moment during the shoot when everyone was getting ready for the next scene when I just stood there and I was so excited, I kept pinching myself, like, is this real? I was like, wow. At least I chilled with some stars. It s special for someone like me to come from the Eastern Cape and make it in the big city. The most special thing was that one of my goals was achieved. I ve always wanted to do something different, especially because I m from a small town. Then all of a sudden I m in a video, making the big life from a small village.It made me believe everything is possible if you believe and work hard until you achieve your goal.I believe I was meant for that life because, actually, there s a saying that says, birds of the same feather, they fly together. So being in Davido s music video, it elevated me somehow. &mdash; As told to Govan Whittles