President Jacob Zuma has called on South Africans to liberate their minds in order to achieve radical economic transformation, which he says will ensure access to socio-economic rights. Zuma was speaking at the official Human Rights Day celebrations in King Williamstown on Tuesday, where government also commemorated the 40th anniversary of freedom fighter Steve Biko’s passing. “In memory of Steve Biko, let us promote the emancipation of the mind. He wanted black people to understand that they are equals with other racial groups,” Zuma said.
“Our country indeed needs liberated minds in order to achieve radical economic transformation.” Biko’s murder at the hands of apartheid police in 1977 was commemorated with the erection of a memorial grave in his honour. Attending the ceremony with Zuma was Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthwethwa and members of Biko’s family. Highlighting government’s inroads in ensuring access to basic human rights, Zuma said he was pleased with government’s provision of social security services in line with the Constitution. The president’s positive remarks are in spite of the critical last minute intervention by the Constitutional Court, which last week allowed an extension of Sassa’s contract with Cash Paymaster Service’s (CPS) to ensure grants were paid on time. Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini will still have to report back to the court later this month to motivate why she shouldn’t be held personally liable for the failure to legally appoint a new service provider to take over from CPS. Zuma, however, offered assurance to those attending the celebrations that grant recipients would not be affected by the current crisis – a promise that was met with cheers from the crowd. “Let me take this opportunity to once again assure all who receive social grants that they will receive their money at end of the month,” he said. Contrary to his earlier calls for the Constitution to be amended to allow land expropriation without compensation, Zuma took a much softer stance saying government would explore “reasonable measures” to expedite land reform. “Land is mentioned specifically in the Constitution especially the need for restitution. As part of our commitment to the restoration of human dignity of our people, we’ll be taking practical and reasonable measures to return land to people,” he said. Zuma said the momentum started in celebrating Biko on Human Rights Day would be continued later this year, with government planning another gathering alongside political party Azapo and the Black Consciousness Movement in September – the month of Biko’s death.