NEWS ANALYSIS If something goes wrong with the payment of social grants &ndash; as seems likely &ndash; the responsibility will lie entirely with Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini and the Parliament that failed to do its oversight job. Thanks to Dlamini s habit of skipping meetings in Parliament and not holding press conferences, however, the department that reports to her, and the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) that falls under it, have been answering the questions. And those organisations have been contradicting themselves and one another, fudging the facts, dissembling, eventually even flat-out lying &ndash; then saying they haven t. These are their greatest hits: We will/won t go or have/have no longer gone to the Concourt Sassa was advised at least four months ago to take its predicament to the Constitutional Court, urgently. It was told to admit to the court that it faced the highly irregular prospect of going into contract for another year with Cash Paymaster Services (CPS), even though that very court had found that the agency&#8217;s five-year CPS contract was unlawful in the first place. It did not approach the court. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.