Religious leaders and Gauteng&#8217;s premier, speaking&nbsp;at the funeral of Ahmed Kathrada, called for a return of the principled leadership espoused by&nbsp;the liberation struggle hero.Anti-apartheid activists, who spent decades on Robben Island alongside Kathrada, and ANC and government leaders, including former presidents Thabo Mbeki and Kgalema Motlanthe, were&nbsp;at Westpark cemetery in Johannesburg on Wednesday.His coffin was draped in an ANC flag and carried on the shoulders of prominent members of the Muslim community and former Robben Island political prisoners Ronnie Kasrils and Laloo Isu Chiba, along with other liberation struggle veterans.In his opening prayer, Moulana Ebrahim Bham called on leaders in attendance to remember the principle: Remain steadfast upon justice, [and move] closer towards justice, even if you are dealing with people you don t like. &nbsp;The Anglican church s Archbishop Thabo Makgoba called on courageous leaders, who are willing to defend the victory of the liberation movement, to raise their voices. In this time when evil triumphs because the good do nothing, inspire us to pick up the torch which Kathy carried, the Archbishop prayed.&#8220;Give us grace to speak boldly when truth needs to contest power, when vision is suspect and when the culture of lies holds sway and gains of our long struggle seem to be compromised in doing so honour the life of Kathy.&#8221;Gauteng Premier David&nbsp;Makhura used his address to applaud Kathrada s vocal criticism of ANC leadership in the final stages of his life. Although he is silent today, comrade Kathy was never a silent man. We are here to celebrate his life because he always made his views known. Even as he lays here today, he refuses to be silent &hellip; Uncle Kathy was never silent, Makhura said.The premier, who is also deputy chairperson of the ANC in Gauteng, praised Kathrada and other ANC veterans&nbsp;who have voiced their dissatisfaction with the current ANC leader. [The veterans are the] voices of reason, the conscience of our movement, the guardians of our non-racial and non-sexist traditions&hellip; You must continue to speak out and draw our attention to the mistakes we may be committing, Makhura said. We, as leaders, must have the humility to listen to stalwarts and veterans of our struggle. We must be angry when anyone insults our stalwarts and veterans for they represent that monumental honour, the dignity and integrity of the liberation struggle. Let s ensure that the views and voices of our struggle veterans are heard and respected, the premier said to loud applause.