The World Bank s private sector arm, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), insists it made the right call when it decided to buy a majority stake in the controversial Net1 UEPS Technologies &mdash; the parent company of Cash Paymaster Services (CPS), which disburses South Africa s social grants.Speaking to the Mail &amp; Guardian exclusively, the IFC said it conducted thorough due diligence when it bought its Net1 shares and did not go into the investment blind. The second-largest shareholder, asset manager Allan Gray, has, however, acknowledged mistakes, saying it could have conducted better oversight.The two largest investors in Net1 &mdash; the IFC and Allan Gray &mdash; have come under intense scrutiny following the last-minute scramble to extend the contract between CPS and the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) for the payment of social grants to 17-million beneficiaries. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.