Disgruntled ANC leaders have followed through on their threats to publicly denounce President Jacob Zuma s decision to axe former Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan.And, if they follow through on their further threats, Zuma will find himself facing off against ANC MPs in Parliament when a motion of no confidence is next tabled.Among the 10 ministers axed is Minister of Public Service and Administration Ngoako Ramatlhodi, who has still not been officially informed of his dismissal.The ANC national executive committee (NEC) member lambasted Zuma s decision to reshuffle his Cabinet, saying it has probably caused irreparable damage to the governing party. This [Zuma s decision] has torn the ANC apart and possibly caused an irreparable [damage], said Ramatlhodi in an interview with the Mail &amp; Guardian on Friday.Meanwhile, earlier on Friday, ANC secretary general Gwede Mantashe reportedly blamed the Gupta family for deepening divisions in the ANC, saying it had succeeded, where the apartheid government had failed, for many, many years , to divide the party.Ramatlhodi said ANC leaders were no longer in charge of the organisation.&nbsp; I have been with the ANC since I was young. When you have the deputy president and the secretary general saying we were not consulted before the reshuffle, there is a serious problem. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.