Barcelona coach Luis Enrique ended speculation over his future on Wednesday by confirming he will leave the Catalan giants at the end of the season, blaming the huge pressure of the job for his decision. I will not be the coach of Barce lona next season, Enrique said after Bar a s 6-1 thrashing of Sporting Gijon in La Liga. It is a difficult, measured and well-thought-out decision and I think I have to be loyal to what I think. Enrique s contract is due to expire at the end of the season.The former Barcelona captain has won eight trophies in his three seasons in charge, including a treble in his first campaign and a La Liga and Copa del Rey double last season.Barcelona president Josep Maria Bartomeu said Enrique would go down as one of Bar a s legendary coaches. But his future was placed in serious doubt after Bar a s 4-0 thrashing at the hands of Paris Saint-Germain in the first leg of their Champions League last 16 tie two weeks ago. There are three exciting months ahead. We are in a difficult situation, especially in one competition, but with the help of everyone and if the stars align we can turn that game around, Enrique added.Like his friend and former teammate, Pep Guardiola, who stepped down after four glorious years in charge of Bar a in 2012, Enrique highlighted the pressures of the top at the Camp Nou as his reason to step down. The reason is the way in which I live this profession. It means very few hours of rest. Midfielder Ivan Rakitic said Enrique s decision has left the Bar a players open-mouthed . The coach came into the dressing room and told us before the press conference, said Rakitic. He has all the support of the dressing room. We will do everything we can to do our best in the months to come. Manchester City manager Guar diola paid tribute to Enrique s three unbelievable years in charge. As a Barcelona fan, I m sad that we ll miss the perfect trainer for Barcelona, Guardiola posted on his official Twitter account.Sevilla boss Jorge Sampaoli is the early favourite to take charge next season after leading the Andalusians to an unlikely La Liga title challenge and into the Champions League last 16 in his first season in Spain.Athletic Bilbao coach and former Barca player Ernesto Valverde is also a leading candidate. We will work with discretion and from July 1 we will announce the name of the new coach, added Bartomeu. We don t have to speculate more and we need to concentrate on the future. We have La Liga, the game against PSG, the Cup final and much more work to do. Victory over Sporting took Bar a a point clear of Real Madrid at the top of La Liga, but Real have a game in hand. Unless Bar a stage an unlikely comeback against PSG on March 8, Enrique s last game in charge will be against Alaves in the Copa del Rey final on May 27. &mdash; Agence France-Presse