Siyabonga Gama is not sure he should be here. Here being wedged between a Mercedes-Benz Maybach, the red carpet and scores of security nodding in supplication to the suits. Every year Amir has asked me to come, so I thought I d come see, the Transnet boss says at the annual gathering of African chief executives. The wealth represented at the end of that red carpet leading up the marble steps in Geneva, Switzerland, easily dwarfs the gross domestic product of the entire continent. Started by Amir Ben Yahmed of the Jeune Afrique publishing group, the Africa CEO Forum has, in six years, grown into an event that attracts more than 1&nbsp;200 business leaders. The opening panel starts with Reinventing the African business model , but Mo Ibrahim, the Sudanese-British communications billionaire, who is on the panel, thinks it s a dumb topic and, after a short referendum in the cavernous main theatre concurs, the conversation rapidly changes to addressing the obstacles facing business growth. Talks such as that on driving change in family businesses and digital transformation have rooms overflowing. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.