&#8220;One bad Test match doesn t mean we are going to forget a fantastic season in which we have won four Test series, including one in Australia, and climbed from number seven in the world to second in the rankings. Proteas captain Faf du Plessis was only too happy to confront his team s shortcomings at the end of a Test match they would probably have lost but for a final day washout at Seddon Park in Hamilton &mdash; provided it was not the abiding memory of a season in which they had ticked all the boxes in their preseason plan.Who is the long-term opening partner for Dean Elgar? Is Hashim Amla s 18-month demise irretrievable because of his determination to play T20 cricket? Has JP Duminy used up the last of his many Test lives? And is Temba Bavuma s ability to score match-changing 70s enough to make up for an average of 30?The four-bowler strategy of three seamers and a spinner looks shaky, even threadbare, in conditions that encourage batsmen &mdash; but where might a fourth seamer or all-rounder be included? Is Quinton de Kock s promotion to number six as simple as many people believe? The lack of hundreds from the middle order, the lack of good starts, it was very frustrating, said Du Plessis shortly before departing from New Zealand. We had a really soft two hours at the end of the fourth day &hellip; there were some tired bodies, but that can never ever be an excuse because the Test series was on the line. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.