The country reacted with shock after President Jacob Zuma announced the new ministers for several government departments.&nbsp;We spoke to ordinary South Africans to see what they thought about the reshuffle.Khanyi Mawhayi I am annoyed because I am tired of being angry at the president. I am annoyed by the ANC for making [President Jacob]&nbsp;Zuma untouchable. It is scary that you can go to sleep then wake up the next morning and you are in a different country. It s frightening.Dan Ndwambi I m not a politician but I think that this is worrying. He should have kept Pravin on for a bit longer never mind reshuffling the entire Cabinet. We have a lot of real issues that the president needed to attend to. A reshuffled cabinet is the last thing we need. People do not eat Cabinets.Siphesihle Mahlangu It was shocking but expected. It was clear that something was brewing when he recalled Pravin and Jonas from their trip. It was only a matter of time. But to be honest with you it is still a lot to take in.Lesedi Tsheola He [Zuma] met the expectations of who he is a man full of surprises. The reshuffle echoes South Africa s current state of affairs people being rewarded through patronage. The newly appointed ministers are loyalists. Zuma needs to step down or the country is going down.Faith Nenjerere The president reshuffled hastily. He clearly did not think things through. Bathabile Dlamini is still minister and remember that tomorrow is the 1st of April and there is still no clarity on the social grants matter.Aobakwe Mametse My main concern was that it was all very sudden. Ministers who were inefficient in their previously positions are being deployed to potential &#8220;tougher&#8221; positions. It does not make sense.Sibusiso Hadebe I am personally not interested in what Zuma does anymore. There is nothing I can do. South Africa is one man shown and we have known this for some time now. Not even the ANC was consulted about the move. So what should an ordinary person like me care about such.Christopher Khumalo This is hard to believe. I do not know anything about the economy and numbers but I can tell you this every time I watch the news and they talk about Pravin something always happens to the rand. If someone like me knows that keeping Pravin is good for the rand how can a president not know?Harry Nkuna He knows his term is almost over so a reshuffling of the cabinet was necessary in order to guarantee himself favours in the long run.Bongane Mabaso We are all anticipating an explanation of some sort but I am certain it is wishful thinking on our part. What happened last night was unusual. Pravin we expected but he [Zuma] cleaned house last night. Surely we deserve at the very least a reason for this ridiculous move. How many times has the rand fallen in the last few days? Our leadership clearly does not care.Marco Makuna I think Zuma made the right call despite the public backlash. He thought the ministers were not competent and he replaced them. I am not much of a leader but is that what not a leader is supposed to do? The speculation around Pravin s future has been haunting us for some time now and he finally put us out of our misery. If only he can be so willing to act all the time.