The South Africa we ve come to know, love and loathe is back for another season after a riveting 2016. We re fast learning that just because everything is gasp-worthy and probably unacceptable according to our lofty moral standards, that doesn t make it stop or go away or change the exorbitant price of a Nando s family meal these days. From a metered taxi strike that gridlocked an entire highway and continues to boggle the mind to an airport heist, it s no wonder we re all cynics. We re just trying our best to feel something before being launched into the next traumatic piece of news. OR Tambo International Airport was at the centre of controversy last week after R200-million was seized from the cargo area in an elaborate secret looting spree. Allegations of corruption have been made, with too many fingers pointing at the security staff of Airports Company South Africa. A gang of 13 men went unnoticed because they were either disguised as staff or given access. I m still stuck at that amount of bank notes making its merry way across the runway on a trolley and out of the country to London. Also, who has the audacity to pull off a crime of this nature? I wonder if we re going to be able to handle the truth, if it comes out. We are a nation ripe with Fallists, which should mean we re a citizenry always in search of equality. But when the metered taxi industry holds consumers to ransom, how far is too far to fall? The most bewildering thing about the metered taxi strike against Uber or similar business models is the idea that consumers would, in a world where they can pay less, pay more, whether in a bid to support black-owned business or not. Although Uber and every metered cab are required by law to have a meter licence, there has been some back and forth about whether the transport service has some sort of advantage in the industry. I find it difficult to believe Uber is operating illegally. As much as Uber may not be what it used to be &mdash; some users have spoken out against bad service and even assault &mdash; does the metered industry have a leg to stand on? Metro FM Music award-winner Riky Rick has said goodbye to politically connected record label Mabala Noise, owned by ANC Youth League treasurer Reggie Nkabinde. The rapper allegedly grew too woke to sell his soul at the altar of clout. His speech at the awards ceremony said as much. After mounting the stage to receive an award that is rumoured to have been bought by the label, Riky Rick told the organisers to stop playing with the people. At the end of Monday, Mabala Noise s stance was that Riky Rick is still contractually bound to the label and they know nothing about his departure. When reports emerged of a car being hijacked in Durban with a baby inside, social media users held their breath for good news. A big search party was deployed to find the baby. As it turns out, this was more a kidnapping than it was a hijacking, with S bongile Mbambo, the baby s mother, allegedly behind it from the beginning. Baby Siwaphiwe Mbambo became the subject of social media cries to locate her under #BringBackDurbanBaby. Several plot twists later, she was found inside a car that Mbambo s lover and his girlfriend were driving, following a high-speed police car chase. It s not clear who the baby s father is, with the 26-year-old accused saying he wants a paternity test to prove that he is the father and not Mbambo s polygamist husband. The police are reportedly suing the woman for false reporting.Or does she? More than a week after queen-of-rap rival Remy Ma released the unsparing diss track ShEther addressing Nicki Minaj, the Pills N Potions rapper finally dropped a response in the form of No Frauds. She also rounded up Young Money stable mates Drake and Lil Wayne to release Changed It and Regret in Your Tears. Up against Remy Ma s superbly capable form and rhyming skills, Nicki chose not to steer too far from her lane, choosing wisely rather to make a hit, a club banger, a crowd-pleaser that is undoubtedly going to sell more. It was a good attempt at tightening her bars but it just doesn t match. Sadly, Remy Ma is said to have called it quits on the feud because she s tired of clawing at another sister, making us all look bad in the process. How about that?&nbsp;