Midnite &mdash; Arise Again. A dude I know once called Rastas the slow kids of the Black Consciousness movement who couldn t string a sentence together. Well, I wouldn t be that cynical, but usually in reggae, emphasis seems to be on cadence more than the poetic rendering of imagery. Enter Vaughn Benjamin, Midnite s primary vocalist. He always seems to sound erudite but not academic, spiritual without the same hackneyed flipping of scriptures. He is the&nbsp;university of life, basically. (KS)The OA (Netflix). I m only three episodes in and already spellbound. The story centres on a character named Prairie Johnson, played by the show s creator Brit Marling, who returns to the community where she grew up after a seven-year absence, calling herself The OA and with the ability to see again after years of blindness. Mind-bending. (SM)With For Honor in the rear-view mirror and a certain Andromedean space feels game a whole week away, it s been the perfect time to do my Overwatch placements for the new ranked season. Nearly a year on from launch and that game continues to charm and thrill. But maybe that s down to the kind and enthusiastic community that s grown up around it &mdash; at least in my neck of the online woods. If only my ranking matched my appreciation. (TSM)Leye Adenle: Easy Motion Tourist. In this noir thriller, actor and writer Leye Adenle depicts a Lagos that is at once distant yeteasily familiar. He infuses it with a darkness that is futuristic and palpably possible, with a flair for exacting description and infinite outlandish scenarios. The prose flies off the page with your imagination. (KS)Paul Duncan and Alain Proust: Hidden Johannesburg (Penguin). From the duo who produced Hidden Cape Town, Hidden Johannesburg is a visual anthology of 28 of Johannesburg s architectural gems. It includes the interiors of L Ron Hubbard s sprawling Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired Linksfield home, St John s College formidable campus, St George s Church across the road, the other-worldly interiors of some of the city s synagogues, old colonial homes and the reception rooms and detail from the Art Deco apartment buildings of Killarney and the city centre. (MB)Lee Middleton and Alexia Webster: Unintended Consequences. A gripping photo-essay based on the research of Mercy Brown-Luthango at the African Centre for Cities. Her work investigated the links between upgrading informal settlements, violence prevention and the hopes and fears of youth in Mitchell s Plain and Khayelitsha. (SM)The Lists were compiled by Friday editor Milisuthando Bongela, senior arts writer Kwanele Sosibo, gaming writer @ TheSerifM and contributor Sindi-Leigh McBride