President Jacob Zuma is set to announce a major reshuffle of his cabinet. Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan has been axed, and has been replaced by Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba. Deputy Minister Mcebisi Jonas has also been replaced by Sfiso Buthelezi.The new ministers are: 1.&nbsp; Minister of Energy, Ms Mmamoloko Nkhensani Kubayi2.&nbsp; Minister of Transport, Mr Joe Maswanganyi3.&nbsp; Minister of Finance, Mr Malusi Gigaba4.&nbsp; Minister of Police, Mr Fikile Mbalula5.&nbsp; Minister of Public Works, Mr Nathi Nhleko,6.&nbsp; Minister of Sports and Recreation, Mr Thembelani Nxesi7.&nbsp; Minister of Tourism, Ms Tokozile Xasa8.&nbsp; Minister of Public Service and Administration, Ms Faith Muthambi9.&nbsp; Minister of Home Affairs, Prof Hlengiwe Mkhize10. Minister of Communications, Ms Ayanda DlodloSeveral deputy ministers were also affected. 1.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Public Service and Administration, Ms Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba2.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Finance, Mr Sifiso Buthelezi3.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Ben Martins4.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Arts and Culture, Ms Maggie Sotyu5.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Mr Gratitude Magwanishe6.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Communications, Ms Thandi Mahambehlala,7.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Tourism, Ms Elizabeth Thabethe8.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Police, Mr Bongani Mkongi9.&nbsp; Deputy Minister of Telecommunications and Postal Services, Ms Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams10. Deputy Minister of Small Business Development, Ms Nomathemba November.The president contacted affected cabinet ministers individually ahead of the formal announcement.On Thursday evening, Zuma called a special meeting of the ANC s top six officials Cyril Ramaphosa Baleka Mbete Gwede Mantashe Jessie Duarte and Zweli Mkhize, at his the presidential home, Mahlambandlopfu.Earlier on Thursday, the SACP confirmed that Zuma had told its members that he planned to replace finance minister Pravin Gordhan and his deputy Mcebisi Jonas in a Cabinet reshuffle.READ MORE: ANC top brass reject JZ s badly-written spy files on Gordhan The SACP wish to state that as [per] the norm, the president informed us of his intention to effect a Cabinet reshuffle, replacing both the minister and the deputy minister of finance, SACP deputy secretary general Solly Mapaila said.Zuma is however expected to experience severe backlash to any changes to the cabinet.Five other deputy ministers, and several other ministers will also be affected. On Thursday evening, Zuma called a special meeting of the ANC s top six officials Cyril Ramaphosa Baleka Mbete Gwede Mantashe Jessie Duarte and Zweli Mkhize, at his the presidential home, Mahlambandlopfu. Besides the key finance ministry, he is expected to announce changes to several ministerial positions. Earlier on Thursday, the SACP confirmed that Zuma had told its members that he planned to replace finance minister Pravin Gordhan and his deputy Mcebisi Jonas in a Cabinet reshuffle. READ MORE: ANC top brass reject JZ&#8217;s &#8216;badly-written&#8217; spy files on Gordhan The SACP wish to state that as [per] the norm, the president informed us of his intention to effect a Cabinet reshuffle, replacing both the minister and the deputy minister of finance, SACP deputy secretary general Solly Mapaila said. Mapaila: We reject the intended reshuffle, including the motives for it. #SACP &mdash; SACP (@SACP1921) March 30, 2017 Zuma is however expected to experience severe backlash to any changes to the cabinet.&nbsp; In this week s M&amp;G, the president s detractors in the party warned that they would make Zuma s life unbearable going as far as forcing him to step down if his plan to remove finance minister Pravin Gordhan from his position comes to pass. The anti-Zuma faction has also warned they would join forces with opposition parties in Parliament and vote for a motion of no confidence against him. This comes as the Economic Freedom Fighters and the Democratic Alliance on Thursday announced their plans to have Zuma removed as president.