A young black man wearing a hoodie walks in a dimly lit suburb where he is summarily attacked and kidnapped by some unseen assailant to the incongruously ominous strains of Flanagan and Allen s Run, Rabbit, Run.That scene from Jordan Peele s acclaimed film Get Out made my hackles rise and it s no coincidence that it harks back to the killing of Trayvon Martin, thereby setting the tone for a journey to the sunken place .Chris (Daniel Kaluuya) and his girlfriend, Rose Armitage (Allison Williams), have reached the meet-the-folks stage of their relationship. She invites him for a weekend getaway to meet her parents, Missy (Catherine Keener) and Dean (Bradley Whitford), in a secluded, affluent suburb. Initially, Chris misreads the family s exaggeratedly accommodating and strange behaviour as nervous attempts to adjust to Rose s interracial relationship. But as the weekend unfolds, disturbing events lead him to an inconceivable truth.Using the premise of the award-winning 1967 film Guess Who s Coming to Dinner, sprinklings of The Stepford Wives, flashes of Rosemary s Baby and well-timed comedy, writer-director Peele creates a compelling study of the banality of evil &mdash; in this case, liberal white supremacy. Visiting your significant other s parents for the first time can be unnerving but this film takes a mundane occurrence and throws a what if? curveball.Much like the aforementioned films where the horror develops slowly, like a sense of dread, Peele deftly ropes the audience into sharing in Chris s paranoia and trepidation that permeates his encounters with the Armitage family and their friends. The film provides social commentary on race relations and liberal dog-whistle racism, while thrilling the audience with a riveting plot. Peele deserves praise for managing the apparent racial components of the film in a way that isn t preachy or convoluted. Though it is his directorial debut, this film doesn t have that feel as Peele manages to pull off a work that only a lived experience could provoke.Get Out offers a fresh perspective for mainstream horror fans, yet remains accessible to people who don t qualify as scream queens. Granted, the humour and horror may not be everyone s cup of tea, with plenty of the usual horror tropes. Get Out sets alight cool white people s feeble assurances that black people are safe with them &mdash; unlike, say, white men with a penchant for khaki and Native American-kitsch eateries. Here we are presented with the less obvious but more deadly unseen scorpion in a shoe: wealthy, well-educated, well-intentioned white liberals.The magic of this film lies in the fact that it seamlessly fuses biting satire with the horrifying spectre of racism. The frights are not situational; there s no Norman Bates shower scene &mdash; the terror is mental because it sets out the power dynamics of racism. Prejudice is so standardised that those who experience it second-guess themselves to their peril. The film is sure to be a worth-the-admission-price crowd-pleaser and although it doesn t quite reach the peaks it could, it is still a great outing. Weirdly enough, Get Out will likely start long-overdue conversations about dope white folks and the soft racism that black people experience to the point where it s an ordinary part of life. Get Out opens in theatres on March 24