It seems more than a little ironic that the World Bank, in the form of its financial investment arm, finds itself entangled in South Africa s social grants scandal and the private company at the heart of the delivery of the grants. That company is Net1 subsidiary Cash Paymaster Systems (CPS), which more than one observer has seen as the unacceptable face of neoliberal capitalism especially in the way it has entwined itself in a public-private partnership with the state, and has done so in a way that has made it very hard for the state to disentangle itself. The World Bank and its related institutions earned a bad name in Africa and elsewhere when they tried to press countries into structural adjustments trying, that is, to get them to turn into functioning capitalist nations, to pay their debts and to govern properly. Much of their programme was rejected or dissed by African leaders (once they had the money), and the World Bank and its sister bodies began to take a different approach. Now, presumably out of the best of motives, the bank s investors have put money into a company that claims to be helping the poorest of the poor while engaging in activities that look much like exploitation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.