A late-night Cabinet reshuffle by President Jacob Zuma has prompted calls for resistance against his leadership and fuelled further attempts to have him removed from office. What should the public do? Organise! former finance minister Pravin Gordhan told reporters and treasury staff at his final briefing as head of the ministry on Friday.Zuma removed Gordhan and his deputy Mcebisi Jonas from the Cabinet on Thursday night.Supporters of the SaveSA campaign, AngloGold Ashanti chairperson Sipho Pityana and trade unionist Zwelinzima Vavi met in Pretoria on Friday to protest against the firing.Opposition parties also added their voices to the new wave of anti-Zuma sentiment, hoping to push the president into stepping down or to use the courts and parliamentary processes to have him removed from office. This is an exit point for Zuma. If all those who are in the ANC and opposition act in the best interest of the country, Zuma is gone, said Economic Freedom Fighters commander-in-chief Julius Malema on Friday.Malema s party has announced its intention to table a motion of no confidence against Zuma. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.