
	‘You have created a jungle’ 	The article Reserve Bank, Absa slam protector written by Phillip de Wet and published in the Mail & Guardian is a piece of gutter journalism. 	Black First Land First (BLF) expects no fairness from our ideological foes, including the M&G. We wear the insults thrown at us as a badge of honour. 
We are at war with white monopoly capital while white-owned media, including the M&G, has a duty to defend its owners by any means necessary. 	We won’t ask that the M&G observe basic journalistic ethics such as hearing the other side of the story. You published a piece of fake news without seeking any comment from those you sought to vilify. We accept this unfair treatment for ourselves, but we have to protest profusely the uncalled-for denigration of the office of the public protector. Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane has ruled that Absa must pay back the money it stole from the public and, because of this, you have chosen to use every trick in the book to discredit her. 	First, your headline on the front page would not pass the judgment of even the most tamed of press ombudsmen. The front-page headline, “How the public protector jumps when BLF calls”, is misleading and designed to harm the reputation of the public protector. The story reveals no “calls” but a meeting and an official submission by the BLF. I’m sure you will hide behind the ruse of figure of speech to justify the deliberate lies you write. 	If the M&G had sought our comment, we would have clarified that, in fact, the final report of the public protector is at variance with our submission. The BLF believes that Absa and other beneficiaries of the illegal “lifeboats” didn’t pay one cent back. Our calculations suggest closer to R10-billion has to be paid back. Your journalist didn’t even read our submission, which his agent in the office of the public protector could have made available on demand. 	There is the truth, which the M&G and other organs of white monopoly capital keep hiding from the unsuspecting public. The hostility of former public protector advocate Thuli Madonsela towards the BLF was political. Madonsela did everything in her power to protect white monopoly capital, in particular Johann Rupert, who is directly implicated in the R26-billion theft from the South African Reserve Bank. 	The proof of the role Madonsela played as defender of white monopoly capital corruption is in the thank you plum job she secured at the University of Stellenbosch where Rupert is chancellor. Are you joining the dots? We believe this is not a coincidence. 	If our media retained a modicum of the objectivity we enjoyed a few years ago, we would demand an apology, which is owed to the public protector, for the slander you published. But today, even such basic human decency is not possible. The M&G is doing the dirty work of white monopoly capital diligently and in the process has thrown journalism ethics out of the window. 	You have created a jungle, hopefully you will be able to live with wild beasts. We are ready for the long haul. – Andile Mngxitama, president, BLF 	Uber has drivers and then it has riders. There are two sides to this story and it is time riders took a moment to stand up and say a few words. 	I am one person in a growing population that has given up their cars to be Uber-only. I chose to live close to my work and I’m now saving thousands. I don’t have to pay for fixing the car or insurance. The monthly budgeted amount is much less than a monthly payment for a nice car. 	I started creating a list of reasons I love Uber in Johannesburg but only a few matter here. The first is customer experience. 	Many of my drivers are philosophers. In fact, I have so many deep conversations with my Uber drivers that my husband has named it Uberntu. Often we talk about life’s fulfilment. My favourite question in the service industry is: “Have you ever been fulfilled by money?” The answer has never been yes. The follow-up question is: “Have you ever been fulfilled when you know you have given someone the best possible service?” Always a resounding yes. 	My next “why” for Uber is safety in numbers. I’ve heard one too many stories about women driving alone in Johannesburg and having to practise defensive driving just to get out of potentially life-threatening situations. I have a little bit of peace knowing I’m not alone in the car and often sitting next to men who are security guards. There is a benefit to knowing drivers have submitted police clearance certificates. 	Last, I am absolutely thrilled that each month I get to give money to people directly as opposed to a large multinational. There is a beauty in being able to discuss someone’s financial goals and feel like you are a little part of them. 	In the end I sincerely hope that the meter taxis realise that they are delivering a service to customers – whether it be a good or bad one. If they do not, then I’m afraid that after the petrol bombs and other violent antics there will be no more customers for them to service. – Johanna Stamps Egbe