Major protests in major cities to call for his head notwithstanding, President Jacob Zuma s support across the country last week remained strong where it really counted: at grassroots level in the ANC. We are fully behind the president, we are supporting him for the reshuffle that he has made in terms of taking the line of march, said Thapelo Dithebe, ANC chair for the Frances Baard region around Kimberley in the Northern Cape. Time and again that message was repeated on behalf of branches and regions, with only minor variation, in both the party s heartland and areas where it is under pressure. The Mail &amp; Guardian spoke to regional or major branch representatives across half the roughly 50 regions into which the ANC divides the country, and dissenters were nowhere to be found. Did Nkandla cost us votes [in the 2016 local government elections], cost us jobs in council? Yes, it did, said a branch leader in Gauteng, who, like all those who were even vaguely critical of Zuma, spoke on condition of anonymity. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.