THE PLAYLISTI had a chance to watch the sublime American Honey over the weekend, ahead of its debut at the European Film Festival, and I was silenced and stunned by this three-hour epic, which follows wayward magazine- peddling teens across the United States, led by newcomer Sasha Lane and Riley Keough, Elvis Presley s granddaughter. (MB)Kool Keith: Feature Magnetic. Kool Keith has still got it. Beats from outer space, bent on bending time. Rhymes that come wrapped in all sorts of unpredictable cadences and schemes. Filth. Smut. International baller s passport. OG confidence. Weird host. Even stranger guests. Keith s style is effortless, so patented it s hard to compare him with anything or anyone. Some people were just born to do this. (KS)Fresh Dressed: This is a great documentary detailing hip-hop s connection to fashion. Dapper Dan and Thirstin Howl III are my favourites. Dan s remixes of high-end fashion brands, in particular Gucci, were ahead of their time, and the Lo Lives is another story of the infinitely inventive ways of staying dipped . (KS)THE READING LISTRichard Rohr: Falling Upwards. This is one of the most satisfying books that fuses spiritual curiosity with the state of the real world, one that also reminds you that, if you engineer your own spiritual awakening, your ego is just as likely in a new role &mdash; it has to happen to you. In this book, which prepares the reader for the second half of life growth, one is primed for the eventual downfall of one s life as one knows it, should one seek to live in deep time and their truer self. For a book that s full of Bible quotes, I m surprisingly sold. (MB)THE GAMING LISTLet s talk colonisation. If you re reading these pages, my guess is you aren t a fan. Don t blame you. But in Mass Effect the point of Andromeda is to colonise the crap out of it, admittedly on behalf of a united humanity and various Milky Way races. Is that okay? And if we re nice to the locals and help them defeat their evil alien oppressors? Still a bit dodge. Anyway, I finished the game this week and plan to move on to destroying legions of the undead elsewhere. My conscience on that, at least, is clear. (TSM)The Lists are compiled by Friday editor Milisuthando Bongela, arts writer Kwanele Sosibo and gaming writer @The SerifM