In his book, The Culture of Disbelief, Yale legal scholar Stephen Carter laments that our public culture more and more prefers religion as something without political significance, less an independent moral force than a quietly irrelevant moralizer, never heard, rarely seen .Contrary to this view, Pope Benedict XVI (as cited by D Vincent Twomey) saw the self-limitation of reason, the distinguishing mark of modern Western civilisation, as having led to the banishment of religion to the private sphere.In contrast, Colin Bird, in his article in the Journal of Applied Philosophy (2013), Does Religion Deserve Our Respect? observes that the past four decades have witnessed a striking religious revival and ferment. Religious leaders and movements have become more politically assertive; as examples, one might cite the rise of Islamic fundamentalism and associated political extremism, the ascendance of the Christian right in American politics, or Pope John Paul II s role in the demise of the Soviet bloc in the 1980s. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.