When Johannesburg-based graphic designer and art director Rendani Nemakhavhani partnered with photographer Kgomotso Neto Tleane in 2016, their collaboration resulted in the first instalment of The Honey, an ongoing photo novella that celebrates black love, Nineties nostalgia and narrative photography.Following the third and latest instalment of The Honey, which launched on April 6 at Umuzi Studios, Nemakhavhani, who plays Aus Honey, and Tleane, who plays Aus Honey s lover Gavini, spoke about the latest iteration of the series which sees them collaborate with musician Nonku Phiri and director Odendaal Esterhuyse.In much of the coverage of The Honey, it s often mentioned that Honey and Gavini are inspired by iconic Yizo Yizo characters Chester and Papa Action. Do you agree? Rendani: I think it works in the inverse, where Rendani and Kgomotso were inspired by Yizo Yizo to create a story line that speaks to where we think Chester and Papa Action would be, had they been a couple living in 2016. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.