 Rare gem Malusi Gigaba is flawedBefore we turn up the volume too much on Malusi Gigaba s praise-singing ( Rare gem Gigaba in it to win it , M&amp;G Online, April 7) let s remember that this rare gem , as home affairs minister, was responsible for overseeing much idiocy and heartache in the great immigrant spousal debacle of 2014-2015.As a privileged South African, I had the means to take home affairs to court back then and win.&nbsp; Gigaba saw fit to dispatch a flock of inept state attorneys and officials to attempt to ensure that spouses and children, wrenched from their families, would stay separated. This was all based on illegal directives, which violated human rights, from a deeply flawed immigration directorate.And, as if that wasn t good enough, Gigaba saw fit to appeal the judgment against the directorate in every court, losing all the way to the Constitutional Court.&nbsp; I had to have another court order served in 2016 to tell the department to give my wife permanent residence. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.