The tide of sympathetic public opinion turned undeniably away from AB de Villiers this week when he confirmed that he would not just miss the imminent Test series against New Zealand, but would also be unavailable for the iconic four-Test series against England in July and August and next summers hors d ouvre series against Bangladesh.On Wednesday he announced his plans to play some four-day cricket for the Titans next summer before competing for a place in the Proteas starting XI for the four-Test series against India next December and January. There was no comment on his plans for the series against Australia which follows immediately in March. Workload management was the preferred, official reason for the great batsman s scheduling but there were a few other, even vaguer references to getting my head right and my life has changed . It is no secret that he was deeply scarred by the World Cup semi-final defeat to New Zealand and the events that preceded it and is now driven by an intense desire to make amends by leading the team to the 2019 event in England.But there may be other, unspecified reasons behind his decision to take a Test sabbatical in 2017. He felt let down to the point of betrayal by CSA when they appointed Faf du Plessis as full-time Test captain, a position he coveted. When an incumbent player is injured his place is usually reserved until he is fit again. Why not a captain?De Villiers also has one of the most lucrative bat sponsorships in the history of the game with Indian manufacturer MRF. It is, however, dependant on him playing in all three formats, especially if the Indian market is watching. Making himself available for the Indian tour to South Africa is no coincidence.Inevitably his decision to play for the Royal Challengers Bangalore in the Indian Premier League where his contract is worth in excess of R17-million has also outraged many of his previously adoring fans. That is, however, around five times the value of his national contract. At the age of 32 and with a second child due, economics played an understandable part in his decision making.One former teammate was unconvinced by it all: The greatest sports team on earth, the All Blacks, live by one creed above all others no individual is more important than the team. AB will do well to remember that. If he does, indeed, lead the team to World Cup victory in just over two years time, his legend and legacy will be secure. Just at the moment, however, it is starting to flake.