There has been no news on South African photographer Shiraaz Mohamed’s wellbeing since he was abducted in Syria more than a week ago, but members of the Lenasia South community remain hopeful he will return home. The Lenasia South civic centre was quiet on Wednesday evening, as around 300 people sat with their heads bowed, listening to the interfaith prayers. Mohamed lives in Lenasia and has become popular in the community because of his work with community newspapers. The Lenasia South neighbourhood watch stood in their bright yellow overalls and, at the back of the hall, Mohamed’s housemate Hamza Kara chatted with the owner of the local butcher shop. Kara (40) has known Mohamed for only a year, but in that time they have grown close enough to call one another “brother bear”. Kara converted to Islam in 2016, and moved in with Mohamed shortly afterwards to learn more about the religion. “When I embraced Islam, I had to leave my home and find a place to stay.
Shiraaz was there and he took me in,” Kara told the Mail & Guardian. Mohamed arrived in Turkey in early January, travelling on assignment with humanitarian aid organisation Gift of the Givers.  He crossed the border into Syria, where he took photographs of Gift of the Givers hospitals and the impact the Syrian war has had on its citizens. He was abducted on Tuesday last week in the northern town of Darkoush close to the Turkish border. The motive for his kidnapping remains unknown, and the identity of his captors has yet to be established. The gravest concern is that there has been no news of proof of life. On Thursday, Gift of the Givers founder Dr Imitiaz Sooliman told the M&G that, because it was not known who had kidnapped him, it has been difficult to obtain proof that he is alive. The organisation is working with the department of international relations and co-operation to bring Mohamed home. The department has been in contact with the Syrian government, whereas Gift of the Givers has attempted to investigate the kidnapping on the ground. In Lenasia South, however, there is hope that Mohamed will return, but the strain of waiting is taking its toll. Mohamed’s family said they could not attend the vigil because they were working to secure his release. Mohamed’s ex-wife, Shirley Brijlal, said the ordeal has been “overwhelming”. “What do we say every time someone asks how we are doing?” she said. “We are paralysed with worry and concern for Shiraaz.” Mohamed’s friends in the journalism community also spoke about their fear at the night vigil. Denis Farrell, a friend of Mohamed’s and a photographer at AFP, spoke about the thoughts that kept him awake at night. “I lie awake at night thinking of the stress he must be enduring,” Farrell said. “Is he warm? Is he hungry? How is he coping?” Mohamed was also well known in the Ennerdale community because of his work in the media industry. He only recently began to be published by larger media publications, after working in community newspapers for 13 years. Even when he wasn’t working, Kara said, Mohamed carries his camera almost everywhere he goes. “Photography is his life,” Kara said.