&nbsp; John Spiropoulos (The minimum wage and the moral economy) expresses concerns about the plight of the poor and high levels of dependency, which I share. But has he stopped to ask himself why the employed have a large and growing number of dependants? Have government policies over the past 20 years punished the productive private sector and forced them to mechanise? Has he stopped to wonder how a minimum wage would affect young people, dependent on a single wage earner? Has it occurred to him that a minimum wage might be the insurmountable obstacle that prevents them from getting on to the first rung of the ladder and working towards being independent, relegating them to a life of permanent dependency? Inequality and poverty persist because South Africa has more than nine million unemployed people. You do not need to be an expert in economics to detect that something is seriously wrong with the explanations of how a minimum wage will miraculously solve South Africa s poverty, inequality and unemployment problems. Wage hikes that follow productivity increases should be welcomed by all, but those that are increased by political diktat should be rejected. The idea that wages can simply be forced up by government decree misdiagnoses the underlying problems of the desperate skills shortages in this country. Forcing up the wages of the working poor will not permanently solve the problem of, for example, South Africa s failed education system. Less than 40% of the country s working-age population has a matric certificate and it regularly ranks among the worst performers in maths and science. This costly, additional layer of regulation will only serve to worsen the unemployment problem. A legislated national minimum wage will have a disparately negative effect on the employment prospects of most new entrants into the labour market and the unemployed &ndash; who are typically young black people. It seems that what Spiropoulos favours is even more of a command-and-control economy than what South Africa already endures. If so, has he read how Venezuelans are suffering under state control of the economy? &ndash; Jasson Urbach, director, Free Market Foundation &nbsp; In articles such as Reality check for nuke power trip, the Mail &amp; Guardian needs to be alert for one more bait-and-switch reality. You quote nuclear lobbyists as denying that the costs could be one trillion rands and saying it would cost closer to R650-billion . But suddenly these are not the total costs, but only the overnight costs . Overnight costs exclude numerous parts of the total costs, the biggest of which is interest charges, which have run to over one-third of the costs of recently built atomic power plants. Let your readers and journalists note nuclear power plants take three times longer to construct than gas-fired power stations (such as the Shanduka contract) or solar power plants. Therefore, nuclear power plants accumulate far more compound interest into their costs. In short, overnight costs are a far smaller proportion of the costs of nuclear power stations than of other power stations. So overnight costs mislead as to the relative prices of electricity from different sources. This is precisely why nuclear lobbyists always quote overnight costs and avoid admitting the total costs. Furthermore, the department of energy makes it explicit that the government s atomic ambitions go far beyond 20 gigawatts of nuclear power stations. Its agreement signed with Rosatom adds on building a uranium-enrichment plant. It also wants a fuel element fabrication factory. We need to be told how much these add on to the costs. &ndash; Keith Gottschalk, Cape Town &nbsp; As a retired education adviser, I must tell readers that Andrew Verrijdt (Teacher tests will fail) is wrong. The British education system works on 30 pupils a class and it is largely effective. Similarly, other European systems have comparable numbers. His parochial attitude is the thinking of the hapless. To equate testing of teachers because inspectors smack of apartheid is defective. All teachers need to be tested before they become teachers. Most teachers welcome support. But to dismiss testing out of hand is amateurish. To play the numbers game is disingenuous. Practising teachers should be able to gauge what time they need to devote to which pupil. No one is disputing that a low pupil/teacher ratio can be advantageous. But Verrijdt should check the facts. Comparing systems by looking at published figures leads only to distorted arguments. &ndash; Tom Morgan