Cape Town Festival of Beer: This is a celebration of the brewing heritage and craft both locally and around the world. Featuring more than 200 brews, this is the premier tribute to all things beer.
Expect more than 60 breweries — with limited-edition beers brewed specifically for the festival. Also, learn more about the appreciation of artisanal beer and food pairings for each brew. Details: December 1 to 3 at Hamilton’s Rugby Club, 1  Stephen Way, Green Point, Cape Town. For more information visit info@capetownfestivalofbeer.co.za  Isambulo, the Musical: Written and directed by Zakhele Mabena, Isambulo displays the African culture of worship. Made up of a cast of 24 artists and a production team of eight, the musical is a clear dramatisation of what you would find in different South African churches. If you’re interested in an insightful piece on the ins and outs of Sunday services, check it out. Details: December 1 at the National State Theatre. For more information visit statetheatre.co.za  Dessert Fest SA: Food connoisseurs and dessert lovers will be convening for the first-ever Dessert Fest SA. Alice Chan, star baker from the BBC’s The Great South African Bake Off, will be creating her showstopper Death by Chocolate cake. Tickets include access to all activities, complimentary dessert tastings, a welcome drink and goodie bags. Details: December 2 to 3 at The Mustang Room at Sally Mustang, 11 Charles Crescent, Eastgate Ext 4, Sandton, Johannesburg. The entrance fee is R100. For more information visit dessertfest.co.za  Take Me Deeper by Portia Zvavahera: Her fifth solo exhibition at the Stevenson is a body of work that arose from the artist’s three-month residency at the Gasworks in London — the longest period she has been away from her family. Drawing from her dreams, which turned into nightmares from the shock of alienation, Zvavahera used the refuge of her studio to process these through colour and gesture. Straddling and surpassing love and fear, intimacy and isolation, vulnerability and safety, Take Me Deeper gives expression to a profound interiority and a form of solitude freed from the burden of estrangement. Details: The exhibition is on until January 13 at the Stevenson, 160 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock, Cape Town. Visit stevenson.info for more details. 