The pivotal players in one of the biggest private-sector scandals involving state capture have walked away with their pockets full of money and are being held accountable by no one. Vikas Sagar, a senior partner at the global consultancy firm McKinsey, left with his pension and a payout from his shares.  [Vikas Sagar, a senior partner at McKinsey, took his pension and shares payout] Nine KPMG South Africa senior partners, including Trevor Hoole, Ahmed Jaffer, Mike Oddy and Muhammad Saloojee, quickly left the global giant once news broke of the company’s dodgy relationship with the Gupta family and its complicity in compiling a “misleading” report about a so-called rogue unit at the South African Revenue Service. KPMG will not discuss what they were paid. German-based global software giant SAP found that three officials were implicated in the scandals that have rocked the country since the Gupta leaks were first reported on.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.