It may be bucketing down, but Gauteng will remain water-insecure until 2025 and it may only be a matter of time until Johannesburg residents face water restrictions again. This stern warning comes from water expert Anthony Turton. Turton, a professor at the Centre for Environmental Management at the University of Free State, said major threats to Johannesburg’s water security include the delay of phase two of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project — an important source of water for the city and Gauteng — and the deterioration of the city’s water infrastructure. Unless the City of Johannesburg urgently replaces and maintains its aging infrastructure, dry taps could become a reality. Nico de Jager, the member of Johannesburg’s mayoral council responsible for infrastructure development, said that if Johannesburg were to experience a drought, the impact would be greater than for Cape Town because the city does not have the option of desalination. “We would be in deep trouble and that is why we urge residents to use water sparingly. The City of Johannesburg is currently facing at least a R5.8‑billion infrastructure backlog and if this is not sorted out in the next 10 years, it will escalate to R12.6‑billion, as most of our infrastructure has outlived its lifespan,” said De Jager. The city does not have the capacity to solve its problems alone because it depends on other parties for its water. Department of water affairs spokesperson Sputnik Ratau said: “Generally Gauteng, and Johannesburg in particular, receives its water supply from the Integrated Vaal River System, consisting of 14 dams.” He added that most of the city’s water supply comes from the Vaal Dam, with the remaining 21% sourced from the Lesotho Highlands Water Project.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.