1. In October, President Jacob Zuma reshuffled his Cabinet for the 11th time.
He had reshuffled it earlier in the year, firing Pravin Gordhan as finance minister. In which month was that? (a) March (b) April (c) May 2. How many ministers and deputy ministers did he change in that early 2017 reshuffle? (a) 17 (b) 20 (c) 23 3. On the basis of these reshuffles, how long is the average life of a Zuma Cabinet? (a) 6.8 months (b) 7.2 months (c) 8.6 months 4. Unemployment reached its highest level in 13 years. How many people are unemployed in South Africa now? (a) 4.3-million (b) 5.5-million (c) 6.2-million 5. Several books about corruption, economic decline and state capture were published in South Africa in 2017. Which of the following is not the title of one of those books? (a) Enemy of the People (b) On the Brink (c) The Zuma Files (d) The President’s Keepers (e) Republic of Gupta 6. Which well-known radio personality published her account of the life of Zuma’s rape accuser, Fezekile “Khwezi” Kuzwayo? (a) Dineo Ranaka (b) Redi Thlabi (c) Thando Thabethe 7. In November, Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe was ousted after 37 years in power. How old was he? (a) 87 (b) 93 (c) 101 8. Mugabe having fallen, who is now the longest-serving African head of state? (a) Yoweri Museveni (Uganda) (b) Teodoro Obiang Nguema (Equatorial Guinea) (c) Isaias Afewerki (Eritrea) 9. Mugabe’s two sons got into trouble for living it up in South Africa. What are their names? (a) Chitungwiza Belladonna and Robert Junior (b) Chatunga Bellarmine and Robert Junior (c) Chakachaya Ballantine and Robert Junior 10. The two Mugabe youths’ mother, Grace, flew into South Africa to discipline them and their hangers-on. For this purpose, she notoriously used an electrical appliance. What was it? (a) An extension cord (b) An ironing board (c) A washing machine 11. One of South Africa’s ministers said there was a “red alert” for Grace Mugabe on the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe when it was feared she might flee South Africa to avoid prosecution for assault. (She was in fact given “diplomatic immunity” and allowed to go back to Zim.) Who was the minister? (a) Maite Nkoane-Mashabane (b) Fikile Mbalula (c) Leon Schuster 12. While Mugabe was negotiating his exit from power, his sons were planning a concert with a Nigerian musician in Johannesburg. Can you name the musician (who didn’t arrive)? (a) Wizkid (b) Timaya (c) Tekno 13. Which former African head of state was tried for and convicted of war crimes, crimes against humanity and sexual crimes, after he had spent more than 20 years in exile in Senegal? (a) Hissène Habré (Chad) (b) Mengistu Haile Mariam (Ethiopia) (c) Blaise Campaoré (Burkina Faso) 14. French President Emmanuel Macron paid a four-day visit to Africa, including an appearance at the EU-AU Summit. Which of the following countries did Macron not visit on this trip? (a) Burkina Faso (b) Côte d’Ivoire (c) Gabon 15. There was an international outcry about the practice of selling people into slavery in Libya. Those preyed upon are often displaced people or illegal migrants. How many such migrants are estimated to be in Libya at the moment? (a) 200 000 (b) 300 000 (c) 400 000 16. Which African football star raised his arms in a “shackles” gesture, in protest against the re-emergence of slavery in Libya, after a November match in Britain? (a) Sadio Mané (b) Paul Pogba (c) Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang 17. In which African country did a private Islamic television channel, Touba TV, mistakenly show a half-hour of hardcore pornography? (a) Guinea (b) Nigeria (c) Senegal 18. The governor of Imo state in Nigeria erected a statue of Zuma, much to the disgust of his constituents. Can you name the governor? (a) Rochas Okorocha (b) Bindo Jibrilla (c) Yahaya Bello 19. United States President Donald Trump threatened nuclear war against an Asian state. Which was it? (a) North Korea (b) South Korea (c) Chick Corea 20. Rapper Cassper Nyovest won six of the prizes at the 2017 SA Hip-Hop Awards. Which of the following is one that Cassper did not win? (a) Album of the Year (b) Hustler of the Year (c) Bigmouth of the Year 21. Who won Song of the Year at the awards? (a) Kwesta (b) Cassper (c) YoungstaCPT 22. Which South African movie is up for an Oscar at the ceremony in Hollywood early next year? (a) The Wind (b) The Wound (c) The Want 23. At the 89th Academy Awards in early 2017, honouring movies of the previous year, the surprise winner of the Oscar for best picture was an indie flick called … (a) Daylight (b) Moonlight (c) Flashlight 24. At the Oscars ceremony, another winner of best picture was wrongly announced. It was … (a) La La Land (b) Manchester by the Sea (c) Hidden Figures 25. Which two Hollywood veterans made the mistaken announcement, then corrected it? (a) Kevin Spacey and Meryl Streep (b) Jack Nicholson and Susan Sarandon (c) Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway 26. Which of the following Hollywood producers was not accused of multiple cases of sexual harassment in 2017? (a) Harvey Weinstein (b) Brett Ratner (c) Brian Grazer 27. Google’s Year in Search showed that South Africa’s top search for 2017 was “Dumi Masilela”, followed by “Zimbabwe”. Which of the following is not on the list of top 10 South African searches for the year? (a) Cyclone Dineo (b) Black Friday (c) Listeriosis 28. Which of the following is not a South African movie released in 2017? (a) Krotoa (b) She Is King (c) Hy Is Dof 29. In August, a huge tropical cyclone hit Texas, causing about $200-billion’s worth of damage. What was its name? (a) Hurricane Harold (b) Hurricane Harvey (c) Hurricane Henry 30. The Atlantic hurricane season was particularly turbulent in mid-2017, producing 18 tropical depressions and the most hurricanes in succession since the start of satellite records in 1966. How many hurricanes were there? (a) 10 (b) 12 (c) 15 31. In Turkey, where homosexuality is legal, the governor of Ankara banned all lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex (LGBTI)-related events. What was the reason given? (a) The events could lead to sex (b) The events could turn people gay (c) The events might disturb peace and security 32. Which of the following is not the name of a perfume released in 2017? (a) Sexy Ruby (b) Ghost Dream (c) Phantom Touch  SEE HOW YOU DID HERE