The return to Eskom of its controversial CEO Matshela Koko — now considered likely — could come before the end of the year, it seemed on Saturday morning, after the ANC said it would get its elective conference underway only some five hours late. But that may still depend on legal action On Friday the Eskom board confirmed it had received a report on a disciplinary hearing into Koko, centred around the very large tenders that, under his watch, went to a company involving his daughter. The board would not disclose details of the outcome of the hearing, but it was understood Koko had been cleared of all charges. On Friday Eskom chair Zethemba Khoza said he hoped to convene a board meeting to discuss the Koko matter before the end of December, after which it could speak to public enterprises minister Lynne Brown on the way forward. Koko remains suspended, but the lack of any internal finding against him should see that suspension lifted and his return to Eskom as at least a senior executive, if not as acting CEO. On Saturday morning delays at the ANC conference, where several of the Eskom role-players are involved, seemingly made it impossible to schedule Eskom meetings. But with the promise that the ANC would catch up, and finish its work on Wednesday as scheduled, that changed. Informed speculation had it that a board meeting could now be scheduled for Thursday or Friday, so deciding Koko’s fate before things ground to a halt during the Christmas break. But such an attempt may yet be interdicted.
On Friday the DA said it would “lay charges” against Koko, and could turn to the courts to prevent his return in light of such an action. Various other parties previously involved in fighting the return for former Eskom CEO Brian Molefe have previously said they too could step in should Koko’s disciplinary hearing fail to see him permanently removed. On Friday Brown urged a special general meeting at Eskom to conclude “investigative and disciplinary processes” involving its top leaders quickly. “You must not only maintain and observe the highest standards of integrity and probity in the execution of your responsibilities, but also contribute to the transformation of the supply chain to benefit more black South Africans,” Brown told the meeting. “The finalisation of the investigation to all suspended Executives is of paramount importance to rebuild board reputation and restore investor confidence.” Brown instructed the Eskom board to make the appointment of a new group chief executive to replace Molefe a priority.