It is often forgotten that, in her youth, Baleka Mbete was a struggle poet. Today, the Fifth Column, in conjunction with our partners in free-floating surveillance and hacking, is able to reveal a new poem composed just the other day by the speaker in the National Assembly, one of the seven ANC presidential hopefuls … oh oh oh how I want to be the president on top in charge yes yes yes i am woman i can lead i can give orders i can spank Floyd Shivambu -on his bum Juju too spank spank ow ow ow say Floyd and little Julius just you wait yes yes yes oh oh oh bugger off Cyril you old buffalo with blunt horns bugger off Lindiwe i also have sharp nails and if need be i can get a wig bugger off Grace i could be queen queen of Africa i’m better than Grace queen of the people the masses oh oh oh the people the people who have suffered nearly as much as me i grow old i grow old eish struggle struggle fight to be the boss have I waited all these long years bored rigid in Parly just to be cast aside like a used kanga? no no no and again no no no i must put on my turban my Turban of Power i have a bigger turban than that old frump NDZ oh oh oh bring me my turban my biggest turban pad it with rags if need be old torn-up kangas but bring it bring me my turban oh oh oh my Turban of Power! 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.