Since President Donald Trump took office in January, the US has abandoned or threatened to quit several international accords under his “America First” policy. Trump’s advisors insist the slogan does not imply any new isolationist stance, but a pattern of disengagement from multilateral commitments has emerged. On Saturday, the Trump administration announced it was withdrawing the US from a United Nations pact to improve the handling of migrant and refugee situations, deeming it “inconsistent” with its policies. Richard Haass, former head of State Department policy under George W. Bush, has dubbed the Trump administration’s pattern the “withdrawal doctrine.” Here are some of the accords that Trump has abandoned or threatened: In September 2016, the 193 members of the UN General Assembly unanimously adopted a non-binding political declaration, the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, pledging to uphold the rights of refugees, help them resettle and ensure they have access to education and jobs. The Global Compact, based on the declaration, is due to be presented at the UN General Assembly next year.
 But the US mission said the declaration “contains numerous provisions that are inconsistent with US immigration and refugee policies and the Trump Administration’s immigration principles.” The withdrawal is to take effect at the end of next year, when the US will establish an “observer mission” to replace its UNESCO representation. Declaring he was “elected to represent the citizens of Pittsburgh, not Paris,” Trump complained that the accord gives other countries an unfair advantage over US industry and destroys American jobs. The US pullout will not take effect before November 2020. The US pullout killed the deal before it could even be implemented. Trump pledged to negotiate bilateral pacts that would be more favourable to his country. The pact’s fate is now in the hands of Congress, which may decide to break it by imposing new US sanctions on Iran, and Trump has warned that he may unilaterally quit it at any time. Talks began in August but Trump has threatened to pull out of the pact and negotiate bilateral deals if his country did not get a fairer shake by the end of this year.  US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley has stressed that Washington would continue evaluating its role in UN agencies. Once in office, Trump caused jitters among US partners by waiting almost six months before clearly stating his support for Article Five of the alliance’s treaty, which states that an attack on one ally is an attack on all. Trump has said a border adjustment tax, which has been advanced by some Republicans to favour exports, could be a job creator. But it could also be at odds with existing rules under the WTO. © Agence France-Presse