I have always thought it quite appropriate that 16 December – the Day of Reconciliation – rings in the ‘festive season’, as many people regard this public holiday as the start of the summer holidays. This is the time of the year when we get to rub shoulders with strangers and ‘others’ whom we don’t usually engage or socialise with: in our travels, on beaches, at camping sites, in shopping malls, at seasonal markets and other holiday events.
So, in my (ideal) view of the world, Reconciliation Day starts a period when the nation gets to come together in many ways, united in our diversity, to collectively breathe out at the end of the year. The reality, as we know, is different. We are a nation that is deeply divided and troubled by tensions in the face of slow socio-economic reform for the majority who are trapped in poverty and the devastating effects of inequality. Without addressing these, we will not be able to move forward as a nation – not in our economic development, nor in our oneness under the South African flag.  To improve the quality of life effectively for the majority in our country, and to enable stability to deal with the past’s legacies and the new economic challenges of a developmental state, we need to “gel” as a nation. But, this requires trust, respect, dignity, tolerance of diversity, and a shared desire for social justice. These are elements of the “glue” that can unite people in a common sense of identity, humanity and belonging, and result in a more socially cohesive society.  Social cohesion, as envisaged in the Constitution and in the National Development Plan, can enhance productivity and support economic growth by addressing costs associated with mistrust and conflicts in a diverse society like ours. The NDP stresses the need to address poverty, inequality and unemployment not only to stimulate our economy but also because of the deepening societal divisions that these are causing. Tackling this triad effectively, however, requires the coming together of role-players from all sectors through innovative and effective partnerships.  The Mandela Initiative (MI) – a multi-sector platform to investigate and develop strategies to overcome poverty and inequality – has been foregrounding such innovations and collaborations at more than 20 “action dialogues” over the past five years. As one pillar of its work, the dialogues are guided by the Initiative’s strategic themes and were developed as a way of pollinating experience, ideas and research to encourage action, including exploring how to multiply and expand successful projects.  The social cohesion dialogues brought together academics, civil society, government, the clergy, and the private sector. Some key points that emerged at these gatherings are worth considering as we honour Reconciliation Day: These strategies, or conditions, for a more united and cohesive society will not happen overnight. But they do point to the need for a much more deliberate and focused course of multi-sectoral action that goes beyond symbolic days and events aimed at promoting unity. Over the last few years, the Agence Française de Développement, the Poverty and Inequality Initiative at the University of Cape Town and the Institute for Justice and Reconciliation have worked together on a programme within the MI to measure and address the country’s lack of social cohesion. This project aims to help policymakers identify the factors that can improve social cohesion, and it will report back on its work early in 2018. Charmaine Smith is the communication manager of the Mandela Initiative, a university-led national endeavour in partnership with the Nelson Mandela Foundation and administratively based at the University of Cape Town. The Initiative facilitates contributions from and collaborations between the country’s universities; government departments at all three levels; the private sector; civil society; churches; and labour movements and unions.