THE FIFTH COLUMN I find the inauguration of Donald Trump as the president of the United States lacking as the official end of the world &ndash; it doesn t have the pizzazz of Y2K, or the mystery of the Mayan calendar &ndash; but I suspect it will be swifter than Brexit and pack more punch than the 2008 economic meltdown. Trump s inauguration promises to be a low-key affair, artswise. Elton John refused to play, citing political differences and good taste. A dance troupe called the Rockettes will perform on a voluntary basis joined by a variety of classical artists including, I presume, avatars of the orchestra that played on the ill-fated ocean liner Titanic, who will, sadly, give their all for an audience who still doesn t know what the big deal around the Titanic was. The rest of us will watch the event &ndash; it s like a car crash! &ndash; on mute, with Louis Armstrong s What a Wonderful World playing in the background to prolong the denial that this is all happening for as long as possible. No A-list movie stars are expected to attend the ceremony &ndash; a fact I can confidently report based on the assumption that any A-list movie star spotted at the event will immediately be downgraded to a B or even a C. True A-listers, as we all know, save visible protest for the big screen. I expect a string of movies based on and slating Trump s inauguration &ndash; all starring Meryl Streep &ndash; to be released straight after the event and streamed to wherever it is we all go when the world ends. Mars, probably; 2009, hopefully. When President Barack Obama was inaugurated in that year, hope pulsed through the world. I even felt it at work when my boss pitched up with an Obama T-shirt. God only knows where he got it from. Our Fifa World Cup was around the corner and the @RealDonaldTrump account was run by a mild-mannered publisher who tweeted quotes from Trump s books and the odd holiday greeting. Oh, how things have changed. Staring the words President Trump straight in its double-chinned face, I have to ask myself, what the hell happened? How did we go from hope to hate? Where did all the grown-ups go? Is this really the end? For most of my life, I have been told bad things that happen are not the end of the world. A bottle of All Gold tomato sauce that broke in my primary school textbook-filled backpack was used as a prime example of that, along with the assurance that it could have been much worse. I m still here &ndash; it wasn t the end of the world after all &ndash; but it was the end of my backpack as I knew it, in the same way January 20 2017 will be the end of the world as we know it. And that s another song that, ironically, won t be played at Trump s inauguration.