Letta and Caiphus Live in Concert: As part of the 10th annual Mzansi Fela Festival, the State Theatre is hosting Letta Mbulu and Caiphus Semenya for a one-night-only concert featuring music from the couple’s 20-plus albums together, recorded over the space of 52 years. Details: September 17 from 8pm at the State Theatre’s Opera theatre, Tshwane.
Book at Computicket. Buyel’ Ekhaya Pan African Cultural Festival: Once a year, more than 20 000 music fans descend on East London for the Buyel’ Ekhaya festival. This year, the festival is headlined by Oliver Mtukudzi and Ringo Madlingozi, as well as by pop, house and gqom sensations Zahara, Distruction Boyz, Black Coffee, Vusi Nova, Amanda Black, DJ Tira and Ntando. The festival includes a fashion show by emerging Eastern Cape designers alongside established designers Laduma Ngxokolo, David Tlale, Thula Sindi and Taibo Bacar. Details: December 17 from 10am at the Buffalo Park Cricket Stadium, East London. Book at Computicket.  A dose of Nectar with Upile Chisala: The Cheeky Natives and WordNSound host Upile Chisala for an afternoon of poetry reading, performance and discussion. Chisala, a Malawian storyteller, poet and sociologist, is a part of a wave of African feminist writers bringing black women’s stories to the fore in all their complexity. Details: December 17 at African Flavour Books, 20 Melle Street, Braamfontein. To reserve a ticket, visit bit.ly/2zCrmqM The Communion with Sounds & Words: If you’re in the mood for an intimately emotive fusion of music, poetry and spoken word, come and commune with the Sounds & Words collective. The aim is to reimagine creative spaces and art performance to facilitate a deeper level of communion with the audience. Details: December 17 from 7pm at the Alexander Bar, 76 Strand Street, Cape Town. Visit alexanderbar.co.za for more information. The Litchi Orchard Rum Fest: To celebrate summer, the Litchi Orchard is joined by Tapanga Rum for this year’s interactive rum fest experience. Enjoy a day out in the tropics at this unusual venue near Durban with world-class rum cocktails, good food, soulful music and great company. Details: December 16 at the Litchi Orchard, Old Fort Road, Salt Rock. Book at Webtickets. 