Next year Parliament will be asked to radically alter the relationship between South Africa and the International Criminal Court (ICC) — and so explicitly protect serving heads of state from prosecution for genocide and war crimes. Under a new draft law, the International Crimes Bill, those who can claim diplomatic immunity, such as high-ranking officials of foreign governments, will also be excluded from prosecution under South Africa’s anti-torture law. As the law currently stands there is no immunity in South Africa for those who commit “unimaginable atrocities” such as systematic rape or murder, specifically because immunity was previously held to encourage a sense of impunity. But, the government now says, a lack of immunity specifically for heads of state hinders international relations and imperils peaceful conflict resolution.  However, the new approach to international crimes, specifically the immunity aspect, is likely to face some stiff opposition when it comes before Parliament. “We will certainly make submissions to Parliament when the time comes,” said Kaajal Ramjathan-Keogh, head of the Southern Africa Litigation Centre (SALC), this week. In mid-2015, Sudanese leader and suspected genocidaire and war criminal Omar al-Bashir escaped South Africa despite what local courts and the ICC have confirmed was an iron-clad obligation to detain him and deliver him to justice.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.