A total of 560 medical and 480 engineering students will become the first beneficiaries of missing middle families to receive free tertiary education thanks to a R200-million donation from the private sector.They are among 2 000 students selected to be part of a pilot project aimed at providing financial assistance to missing-middle students, whose family annual income is above R122 000 but below R600 000.Currently, only students with a family income of up to R122 000, as well as those who attended quintile one, two and three schools (the poorest schools), and whose families are recipients of social grants qualify for financial assistance from government s National Student Financial Aid Scheme.Sizwe Nxasana, who heads a ministerial task team that is investigating a comprehensive funding model for poor and missing-middle students, confirmed that 60% of the R140-million donated by the private sector came from commercial banks. He said a further R60-million had been committed.Others selected to participate in the Ikusasa Student Financial Aid Programme s pilot project include:Nxasana, who is the former chief executive of FirstRand, said the students full cost of study, including tuition, accommodation and books, would be paid.Last year his task team presented the government with a blueprint on how to fund students from poor and missing-middle backgrounds. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.