Gauteng Premier David Makhura delivered his 2017 State of the Province address (Sopa) with the weight of the ANC s turmoil on his shoulders, as the party faces the risk of losing control of the province in the 2019 national elections.The Life Esidimeni tragedy, a dismal performance in the 2016 municipal elections and internal party squabbles meant Makhura was under heightened pressure to demonstrate effective delivery last year and to show that more would be done in the remaining two years of his term. His address on Monday in Randfontein was clouded by the deaths of 100 psychiatric patients who, under the auspices of the Gauteng health department, were transferred from Life Esidimeni healthcare centres to ill-equipped nongovernmental organisations.The transfer was an attempt by the department to cut the rising costs of maintaining the contract, as part of its quest to reach a healthy financial status. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.