Many of the traders identified in the Competition Commission s currency-rigging case against major banks are still employed by them, and some are still on the banks trading floors.The commission is seeking to fine 17 banks heavily for their hand in allegedly colluding to manipulate the rand-dollar currency trade over eight years. Those implicated include Absa, Standard Bank and Investec, as well as international banks such as the Citibank Group, JPMorgan Chase, BNP Paribas and Standard Chartered.If the scandal unfolds as other rate-fixing scandals have over recent years, it is unlikely the collusive behaviour was explicitly sanctioned by those higher up in the banks, although in many cases fairly senior personnel have been implicated in the commission s referral document.At Standard Bank, the head of foreign exchange trading, Richard de Roos, and an experienced trader, Bryan Brownrigg, have been implicated. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.