The South African Football Association (Safa) and Bidvest Wits faced off in a tug-of-war for Phaka-mani Mahlambi s services throughout the week leading up to the U-20 s departure to Zambia, to take part in the African Cup of Nations tournament that starts on Sunday.Wits is reluctant to release their precocious star striker who has just returned to action after being sidelined for 10 months by a knee injury that required surgery, with chief executive Jose Ferreira claiming they are not obliged to release the player because the tournament does not fall on a Fifa-sanctioned date.Safa president Danny Jordaan expressed his disappointment and said Wits s hardline stance about Mahlambi went against the organisation s Vision 2022 when the U-20 players would be 24 years old and at the prime of their careers when the 2022 World Cup is played in Qatar. We must find a core group of players in that age category that must be exposed to a sustained international programme so that by the time we qualify for Qatar they should form the core of the Bafana Bafana team and the first step towards that goal is to participate in the U-20 Afcon, said Jordaan. If we reach the last four, this very group will then qualify for the U-20 Fifa World Cup in Korea later this year. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.