In Mamelodi s Phomolong township near Pretoria, people are opposing the reportedly illegal occupation of newly built RDP houses by Zimbabweans . About 50km away, in Joburg s south, Rosettenville residents set fire to what they claimed were Nigerian drug dens and brothels.As it turned out, the Red Ants eviction company had been sent in by Tshwane metro to secure the incomplete homes in Phomolong. Among those who attacked a Rosettenville brothel was a woman whose husband was a customer.Although the attacks and anger stirred up in both cases can be linked to xenophobia, deep-seated suspicions and personal, internecine battles also fan the flames of violence. In Rosettenville, 12 houses were torched. Residents insist their fight is against a drugs and prostitution syndicate, allegedly being run by Nigerians, and they claim police action further angered them.The protests were triggered by the eviction of an elderly couple from one of three houses residents identified as drug dens and brothels. This led to a meeting at which residents decided to stage a march to the houses, which were later set alight.Days after the first attacks, residents took to the streets again. This time, the arson attacks took place after Johannesburg metro police fired rubber bullets at the crowd, who claimed they were demanding a progress report on raids conducted at the earmarked properties.Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba is not convinced that xenophobia was behind the recent spate of arson, but hinted that Jo burg mayor Herman Mashaba may have incited the attacks on immigrants. Residents claim they resorted to violence after the police fired rubber bullets at them. Nigerians living in the area have disputed the allegations and have put the blame on xenophobia. Simphiwe Hlafa, an ANC activist and organiser of the first protest, said: The community is doing things for itself. We never burnt any property, so to speak. We cleaned it, that s how we view it. We cleaned the very same property that s used as a brothel. Gigaba and Gauteng community safety MEC Sizakele Nkosi-Malobane met leaders of the Rosettenville community and representatives of the Nigerian union in the area. Gigaba later again visited Rosettenville as well as Yeoville, Hillbrow and Mayfair, reportedly to repair damage he believes may have been done by Mashaba s description of illegal migrants as criminals who are messing up Johannesburg . It could very well make one popular to say irresponsible statements that could incite vigilantism. Leaders have a responsibility at all times to be measured and consider the fact that, as a result of what you say, there could be lives lost, Gigaba said. In response, Mashaba s office said the mayor welcomed foreigners. They play an important role in growing our economy and creating much-needed jobs. However, he [the mayor] asks for anyone visiting our city to do so within the legal framework and respect the rule of law. On February 5 Rosettenville residents staged the first protest: a march to the Moffatview police station. Although people from countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo and Pakistan reported having a good relationship with residents, the residents complained about drugs and the apparent influence the Nigerians have on law enforcement. Nigerian Maxwell Izumbu, who owns the De Cruze nightclub in Rosettenville, said he was in church when the nightclub was looted and set alight. De Cruze has been open for two and a half years and has earned a reputation as a drug haven. It s lies, there aren t any drugs being sold here. The [sports bar] upstairs was also open but they didn t touch it because it s owned by a South African. So I can say it s xenophobia, Izumbu said.Two streets away from Izumbu s club, his countrymen were repairing the front wall and electricity connection of a house that Rosettenville residents said was a brothel. Burnt furniture was piled up in the yard and unused, mostly government-issued, condoms lay scattered around. One of the men, who did not want to be named, suspected the house was targeted because of the clients seen frequenting it. The same people who came to burn our place know these girls here. Next time they come, we ll be ready. We can t just leave them to destroy us again, he warned.Hlafa was unperturbed: We know where their children go to school, we know where their wives are running their salons, we know where their churches are, the Nigerians. So we are not worried about that [threat]. Half an hour s drive north up the N3, residents of Phomolong have had their hopes of owning new homes dashed three times, as deadlines for occupying RDP homes in Hatherley passed. Then word spread that Zimbabweans were occupying the new homes. Every week the [councillor] promises people they will move into those RDPs in extension 22 [Hatherley], but it never happens. We go there and see Zimbabweans living in the houses, residents association member Oupa Mtshweni said.But when the Mail &amp; Guardian visited the RDP development, the only people found occupying the houses were Red Ant employees. Though the company does employ a number of Zimbabweans, workers on site confirmed they were asked to occupy and guard the houses on a two-week rotation shift, because plumbing and electricity had not yet been installed. I m from Orange Farm but I stay here for two weeks then at home for another two weeks. Red Ants hired us to keep the houses safe from being damaged. I don t think there are Zimbabweans that have received houses here, said Paseka Hlaloha. Pamphlets have been distributed throughout Mamelodi. Zimbabweans, Nigerians, Pakistanis etcetera are not our countrymen. [They] bring nothing but destruction, hijack our buildings, sell drugs, inject young South African ladies with drugs and sell them as prostitutes. How is that helping us? They have destroyed our beloved Johannesburg. Now they are destroying Pretoria, the pamphlet reads.A march is planned from Church Square in Pretoria, for February 24. Back in Rosettenville a second protest took place the weekend after the alleged brothels and drug dens were repaired and returned to business.As the first attack on the brothel was unfolding, no one bothered to wake up police officer Lucky Buthelezi, who stays in the same building. He didn t wake up until the flames had already engulfed most of the room next door to his, and much of the roof. Buthelezi said he rented a room attached to the building but insists he was unaware of the alleged drug peddling and prostitution. I have been staying here for two years but had no suspicion [of illegal activity], Buthelezi said.But Thuli Ndlovu, who lives in the house directly across the street, said: There were two Nigerian guys and different girls that used to stay here and stand outside late at night. We all knew what was happening here. I think he [Buthelezi] was just minding his own business because it has nothing to do with him. But he must have known, she added.One of the women from the same street, who did not want to be identified, said they didn t bother warning Buthelezi or any police officer in the neighbourhood because they are all the same &mdash; they do nothing even though we complain .Buthelezi said he felt betrayed and considered himself an important member of society because of his job. They betrayed me. The same people who burnt the house are the ones that helped me carry out my furniture and possessions. They know me here. In every street, they know I m a police officer, he said.During Gigaba s visit, a heated confrontation took place outside another alleged drug den between a Nigerian, who held up a placard in support of the effort to rid the area of crime, and a resident. What about the 13-year-old and 12-year-old girls you people are prostituting? If you want to help, why don t you expose your friends and tell them to leave? You must go back to your country. You are making our country corrupt, a resident shouted, who was referring to children who were rescued from the alleged brothels by city officials last week.Theodore Ezeunara, chair of the Nigerian union in Rosettenville, said: I am so sorry for what our brothers have done. From henceforth I am prepared to die for the cause of getting rid of the drugs and prostitution in the area. I am with you. Rosettenville residents appeared unconvinced.&nbsp;