It s been almost a month since Johannesburg-based photojournalist Shiraaz Mohamed disappeared in Syria&nbsp;while travelling with the&nbsp;disaster relief organisation,&nbsp;Gift of the Givers Foundation.&nbsp;The organisation said&nbsp;Mohamed had been kidnapped on January 10 while&nbsp;on his way to the Turkish border.But a series of statements by Gift of the Givers has confused the public, with people raising questions on social media.On January 23,&nbsp;Imtiaz Sooliman, founder of Gift of the Givers, said the organisation had an idea of where Mohamed was but that the information was classified.&nbsp;But on Friday, the aid group released a statement that suggested they were still searching for him. [Our task team] has engaged many role players seeking clarification and assistance in finding Shiraaz.&#8220;In the past 48 hours, people bearing a range of titles including NGO director, medical director, security representative and investigation representative, have either visited Gift of the Givers&#8217; Ar Rahma Hospital or engaged us in various locations. The message is the same: there was no reason for anyone to take Shiraaz, the statement said.Second, the fact that no group has claimed responsibility and no&nbsp;demands been made casts doubts over the assertion that he had been kidnapped.&nbsp;Thirteen days after Mohamed&#8217;s disappearance, Sooliman said it was normal that no ransom note would have been issued yet. Almost a month later, there is still no ransom note. We can t call it an abduction if there is no ransom note, a South African&nbsp;activist, Yusuf Abramjee, told The Daily Vox.&nbsp;On Saturday,&nbsp;Abramjee said that although he had faith in Gift of the Givers, the organisation&nbsp;had left many questions unanswered.In response, Sooliman said the organisation&#8217;s&nbsp;statements were not contradictory.&nbsp; While negotiations are going on, we need to send our teams on the ground to look for Shiraaz. We cannot sit back and wait in a situation like this, we have to move fast. He said that Abramjee probably did not know how a hostage situation worked. We cannot explain everything that is going on - there is stuff going on in the background. This is our fifth hostage situation and we cannot give every detail because it could be detrimental to the hostage, he said.Mohamed s partner, Shirley Brijlal, said she had become angry and frustrated with the people who had taken Mohamed .When asked about the statements made by Gift of the Givers she said: We can t jeopardise any efforts to locate Shiraaz by criticising the people trying to locate him. Gift of the Givers said&nbsp;Mohamed had asked the organisation to facilitate his entry into Syria to take photographs.Mohamed texted his family a day before his disappearance, saying there was a possibility that he would be detained before leaving Syria. His text said he was confident the South African government and the Gift of the Givers would have him released. &mdash; Daily Vox