A state-funding agency is suing a small businesswoman over non-payment of a R3-million government loan. This is despite clear indications that the agency s officials failed to spot that a letter confirming the existence of a cargo of fruit had allegedly been forged. The suspicious letter has emerged as part of the paper trail in the tale of a Katlehong businesswoman, Mendiswa Mzamane, who is being sued for non-payment of the loan she received from the Small Enterprise Funding Agency (Sefa). The agency, which falls under the Department of Small Business Development, dished out more than R1-billion in funding to boost small enterprises in the last financial year. Mzamane s loan, to fund her foray into the fruit export trade, came with strict conditions that included physical validation of the cargo before the money was to be released. She had sourced fruit through the now liquidated Cosmo Fruit, a company owned by businessman Ioannis Ntinos. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.