While President Jacob Zuma was debating ANC policy this week, the Democratic Alliance and the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) were pushing two different courts to ensure that he was held to account. Each partyseparately argued that it was vital that an example be made of him. If we let misconduct and abuse of power slide, we create the foundation for a weak Constitution which serves the powerful, not the people, and will ultimately collapse, said EFF counsel Tembeka Ngcukaitobi in heads of argument filed in the Constitutional Court last Friday. Holding back on the prosecution of the powerful, in the face of compelling evidence, would be a radical departure for South Africa, said a DA counsel, Sean Rosenberg SC, in his argument, filed in the Supreme Court of Appeal on Tuesday. The EFF wants the Constitutional Court to force Parliament to convene an inquiry into whether Zuma lied to it during the course of the Nkandla scandal, a process that could lead to his impeachment. The DA, in a separate case, is opposing bids by Zuma and the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) to overturn a high court order that opened Zuma up to prosecution for corruption again. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.