ANC delegates would have preferred the target for black ownership in the mining industry to be more than 50%, and not the 30% set in the new mining charter gazetted last month, says Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane. Speaking to journalists on the sidelines of the ANC national policy conference on Monday, Zwane said ANC delegates were happy with the content of the charter but not about the percentage. “They are saying, with time we must go over 50% … but generally, they are happy because we are implementing ANC policy and nothing else. It is not my policy, it is not the department’s view, it is what ANC wants us to implement and we are doing it,” said Zwane. Some in the ANC’s economic transformation subcommittee, including its head Enoch Godongwana, have warned that the new mining charter might result in job losses. Zwane said the government was to be blamed for not being clear with businesses that  legislation would be changed to take the country forward. The Chamber of Mines has applied to the high court in Pretoria for an urgent interdict to prevent the implementation of the mining charter.
Among the changes is the requirement of a minimum of 30% black ownership in the mining industry - up from 26%. Zwane said the department would meet the Chamber of Mines in “a few days” to hear their views. “We also understand their view, they are business and they want to make profit. When we say we must share the economy of this country from the minority hands to the people of South Africa. “I think we must also take a blame as government, partly, that we have not been clear enough to say at a particular point when we are governing, we will have legislation that take this country forward. And business should do business, they can’t do business and govern at the same time. It won’t work because we will not achieve [anything],” said Zwane. He said the majority of South Africans could not be “left behind” because a few people were not happy with the government’s plans. He added that many South African’s are saying the ANC is not delivering on its promises “because we take forever negotiating”. “They will never be a situation in the whole world where people are happy if there are changes, that we know for sure. So we will engage them,” said Zwane. ANC treasurer general Zweli Mkhize on Sunday said the tension between the chamber and the minister needed to be managed. He said the mines had indicated to the party that they did not have adequate discussions with the Zwane about the charter. The M&G earlier reported that Minister of Small Business Development Lindiwe Zulu lauded the new mining charter as a progressive piece of regulation.