The Proteas Women&#8217;s Cricket team lost to England in the semi-finals of the Women s World Cup yesterday. Despite the brilliant tournament they had, all some people could talk about after the match was how the players were left crying on the pitch. The Daily Vox rounds up nine times men cried over losing a game and nobody made a big deal about it. We re not saying it s a problem that male sportsmen cry when they lose or win. Too many men are left to hide their tears after being taught from an early age that real men don t cry. So it s good that male sportsmen feel free to show their emotions. But why the double standard when it comes to women in sports? Many of the online reactions to the Protea women s team&#8217;s tears implied that of course they re crying; that s what girls do.SA losing a WC SF and crying isn&#8217;t new but this time it&#8217;s women&#8217;s team who is crying. Eng through to the final at lord&#8217;s. #WWC17 #ENGvSA&mdash; Vaibhavbansal (@vaibhavbnsl21) July 18, 2017Well, here are nine times male sportsmen cried about losing a game and no one said anything. 1. Ronaldo at Euro 2004 Cristiano Ronaldo is a big fan of the losing cry. This is him crying after Portugal lost the Euro 2004 final against Greece in Portugal. via GIPHY2. Steyn at the 2015 World CupThe Proteas men s cricket team are not strangers to loss especially in those important games. Here, Proteas fast bowler Dale Steyn is left tears after South Africa crashed out of the 2015 World Cup against New Zealand. via GIPHY3. And the Proteas againThe semi-final lost was a tough one for the entire Proteas men s team. Most of the players burst into tears on the pitch as New Zealand hit the winning runs. via GIPHY4. Bangladesh at the Asia CupCricket is rough. The Bangladesh cricket team were also reduced to tears after they lost against Pakistan in the 2014 Asia Cup. via GIPHY5. Suarez during the 2014 Premiership Luis Suarez couldn t hold back his tears after Liverpool drew against Crystal Palace meaning they lost their chance at the Premiership. via GIPHY6. Colombia at the 2014 World CupColombia had a great run at the 2014 World Cup, until they lost 2-1 to Brazil in the quarter-finals. No amount of consolation from the Brazilian team could stop James Rodriguez s tears from falling, and falling. via GIPHY7. Then it was Brazil s turnBefore long, the Brazilian team had their own turn to cry. The Samba boys suffering a blistering 7-1 defeat to Germany in the semi-finals. Here s David Luiz crying his eyes out after the match. via GIPHY8.Messi at the Copa AmericaLionel Messi announced his retirement from international football after missing a penalty in the finals of the 2016 Copa America. Argentina lost to Chile and Messi wept as he made a farewell lap around the pitch. via GIPHY9. Federer, that one timeRoger Federer doesn t get many chances to cry over losing, what with winning 19 grand slams, but even this giant of the game has shed some tears over lost opportunities. The tennis star lost it on centre court after being beaten by Novak Djokovic in the 2014 Wimbledon final. via GIPHYSo to the Proteas women s team, even though the loss sucks, know it s happened to many before. Cry and mourn the loss, and don t worry about the haters.