Save South Africa has released a list of &#8220;minimum demands&#8221; to rally civil society into action against President Jacob Zuma.The organisation, led by ANC stalwart Sipho Pityana, made the demands public on Tuesday during a press briefing. It said South Africa is at a &#8220;crucial stage&#8221; for civil society to unite to &#8220;make sure Jacob Zuma goes&#8221;.Save South Africa has led protest action against Zuma since last year. The group began mobilising once again after former finance minister Pravin Gordhan was sacked in Zuma&#8217;s infamous Cabinet reshuffle earlier this year.&nbsp;Save South Africa and its supporters occupied Church Square in Pretoria and embarked on rolling protests.In what appears to be the next stage of their plans to unseat Zuma, the organisation&nbsp;released the following list of demands to unite civil society and to &#8220;return the state into the hands of the people&#8221;:1. We, the people, demand Jacob Zuma must go2. An immediate judicial commission of inquiry into state capture, as recommended by the public protector, and the dismissal of all those found to be involved in corrupt activity.3. The restoration of credibility in the criminal justice system, and all institutions which are crucial in the fight against corruption. These include the Hawks, the national police service, the National&nbsp;Prosecuting&nbsp;Authority and the intelligence services.4. Public affirmation by all political parties of the independence of the judiciary and the integrity of chapter nine institutions, as well as a commitment to ensure these bodies are properly resourced5. The appointment of credible leaders in key economic institutions that are linked to the fight against corruption. These include the treasury, the South African Revenue Service, the Chief Procurement Office, the Public Investment Corporation, and the Financial Intelligence Centre.6. Full investigations into corruption and misgovernance in state-owned companies and parastatals, followed by the removal of boards, chief executives&nbsp;and management found to be corrupt, and their replacement with reputable and experienced leaders.8. Ensure that&nbsp;Zuma and the Guptas are not allowed to leave South Africa. Their passports must be revoked until investigations around them are finalisedThe majority of the demands focus on weeding out corruption that has plagued the Zuma administration. Save South Africa reiterated that its primary objective is the removal of Zuma, but the only way that president can be removed is if the ANC decides to recall him.The exact methods as to how these demands will be achieved has not yet been made clear, but the organisation says these are &#8220;short-term goals&#8221; to achieve socioeconomic improvement and to transform the electoral system so that leaders are held to account.