Deputy Correctional Services Minister Thabang Makwetla has disputed President Jacob Zuma s remark that the heckling of ANC leaders was a sign of a healthy democracy. Makwetla, who is also a senior member of the Umkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Council, said the May Day incidents, which saw Zuma, ANC deputy secretary general Jesse Duarte and ANC chairperson Baleka Mbete booed off stage by unhappy workers, showed signs of an intolerant society and an unhealthy democracy. Someone can say, well, they have got a right to express their strong feelings that way. But for me, quality democracy is realised in a culture where we can listen to each other and let the view of the majority, the popular view, be respected by those who are in the minority, he said. Makwetla also criticised the United Democratic Movement s Constitutional Court bid for a secret ballot in a parliamentary vote of no confidence in Zuma. Quite frankly, I just find it an insult. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.