Coloured people were on the verge of an uprising, fed up with years of systematic discrimination by the state, the leader of rights group Camissa Movement for Equality, Jerome Lottering, told the United Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) in March. He lobbied representatives from various countries to make demands for coloured people s development during the universal periodic review (UPR), a peer review mechanism set up by the UN to monitor the human rights track record of member countries. As the UPR took place this week, Lottering s claims of discrimination and warnings about an uprising appeared to be vindicated. Residents of Eldorado Park, Ennerdale and Kliptown, south of Johannesburg, took to the streets, demanding housing and economic development. Lottering played a role in galvanising the demonstrations that led to violence and disruptions in the predominantly coloured townships on Monday and Tuesday. He mobilised support for the protests at a meeting attended by more than 1&nbsp;000 people in Eldorado Park on Sunday. Then he distanced himself from the ensuing closure of roads and confrontations between residents and police, and was noticeably absent from the most violent clashes. Despite the dubious timing of the demonstrations taking place at the same time as the UPR and Lottering s claims to the UNHRC being put to the test, the charismatic civic leader insisted the cause was genuine. Civic leader Jerome Lottering denies inciting violence, saying the demonstrations were spontaneous and unplanned. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.