In UCT initiates reparation and healing (May 5), Professor Penelope Andrews, dean of the law faculty at the University of Cape Town, paints a sympathetic background to the campus protests of the 2015 to 2016 period by acknowledging South African society s inability to reckon with the effect of colonialism as a justification for initiation of the Institutional Reconciliation and Truth Commission (IRTC) process.The article avoids key specific dynamics about how this particular process came to be, crafting a narrative that conveniently positions the university as being pre-emptive and at pains to resolve the crisis. I believe this to be an intentional strategy to lay the trap for heavy repression during the next cycle of protests. On February 16 last year, protests accompanied the erection of a shack on a low traffic-bearing road on UCT campus &mdash; an act that was meant to bring awareness to an inflaming housing crisis. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.