Chelsea clinched the title thanks to unlikely hero Michy Batshuayi, while Tottenham said farewell to White Hart Lane in fitting fashion.Arsenal kept their top four hopes alive and Liverpool look destined for the Champions League.Here are five things we learned in the Premier League this weekend.Michy Batshuayi may yet end up as a footnote in Chelsea&#8217;s history, but at least he will now be remembered for scoring a title-winning goal. Prior to his decisive intervention in Friday&#8217;s 1-0 win at West Bromwich Albion, the dreadlocked Belgium striker was at risk of being best known for his irreverent Twitter posts. But with Chelsea toiling at The Hawthorns, he was given a chance by Antonio Conte and took it by forcing home Cesar Azpilicueta&#8217;s cross from close range. Despite having cost 33.2-million when he signed from Marseille last year, Batshuayi is yet to start a league game for Chelsea. Having now demonstrated his usefulness, he will hope to improve that statistic in Chelsea&#8217;s final two games.They may have missed out on the title, but Tottenham Hotspur could scarcely have asked for a more appropriate send-off in their final game at White Hart Lane, their home of 118 years. Harry Kane, born up the road in Chingford, scored the decisive goal in a 2-1 win over Manchester United as Mauricio Pochettino s side equalled the club record of 14 successive home league wins and completed a league season unbeaten at home for the first time since 1964-65. Spurs will move to Wembley next season, while White Hart Lane is demolished and a new, 61 559-seater arena is built in its place. The Lane has become synonymous with Pochettino s thrilling young team over the past two years. Their fans can only hope the team will not have lost their current momentum by the time they return to north London in August 2018.With Arsenal s top four bid in the balance, the sight of Alexis Sanchez grimacing and holding his leg was enough to strike fear into Arsenal hearts. The Gunners had romped into a two-goal lead, only to see Peter Crouch reduce the deficit with a controversial second half effort that went in off his arm. Becalmed for much of the match, Stoke were suddenly revitalised and their barrage of pressure sparked a typically vociferous response from the Stoke fans. It was exactly the type of situation that has often overwhelmed Arsenal in the past, especially at Stoke where they had failed to win on their previous six visits. But Sanchez had other ideas and the Chilean ignored his pain to drill home Arsenal s crucial third goal, sparking a 4-1 win that keeps them in the hunt for Champions League qualification. No wonder Gunners boss Arsene Wenger labelled Sanchez &#8220;a fighter&#8221;.Many of the experts debating the battle to qualify for the Champions League had written off Liverpool as the most likely of the contenders to fall by the wayside. But Philippe Coutinho had the perfect response to the doubters in Sunday s 4-0 rout of West Ham at the London Stadium. Victories for top four challengers Manchester City and Arsenal had left Jurgen Klopp s side with no margin for error in their last away game of the season. Thanks to Coutinho it proved only a minor inconvenience as the Brazilian s majestic pass was converted by Daniel Sturridge in the early stages. Coutinho wasn t finished yet and two clinical finishes cemented Liverpool s advantage. With just a win over relegated Middlesbrough standing between Liverpool and a top four finish, the naysayers might keep their opinions to themselves next weekend.Leicester City winger Riyad Mahrez appeared to have landed a weighty blow on Manchester City&#8217;s push for a top-four finish when he tucked away a 77th-minute penalty to make the score 2-2 at the Etihad Stadium. But he hadn&#8217;t reckoned with referee Robert Madley. The eagle-eyed official - as well as several City players - spotted that in slipping as he struck the ball, Mahrez had touched it twice, thereby rendering the goal invalid. Madley duly chalked it off, allowing City to complete a victory that inched them closer to a Champions League place. &#8220;Well done,&#8221; said grateful City manager Pep Guardiola. Agence France-Presse