The government spent R11-million buying a farm more than a decade ago but plans to convert it into a much-needed agricultural college have come to nought. Instead, the once-flourishing azalea farm, the Carmel Farm Estate, in the Magaliesberg area, west of Johannesburg, is falling apart. The only signs of any development are to be found in documents and on the websites of the Gauteng department of agriculture and rural development, the West Rand district municipality and Mogale City. After a Mail &amp; Guardian enquiry, the Gauteng agriculture department said the project had been abandoned because it was too expensive. Two buildings a double-storey Victorian-style administrative unit and a thatched house are all but buried in weeds. Behind them, collapsing buildings face on to an empty swimming pool. Besides the entrance to the farm, which is enclosed with electric fencing, are rows of greenhouses in various stages of decay. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.