Cape Town International Kite Festival: Kiters from around the world will show off their creations in support of Cape Mental Health — a non-profit organisation that provides mental health services in the Western Cape. There will be food trucks, live entertainment and free kite-making workshops for those who are new to it. 
Details: The event will take place at Zandvlei Nature Reserve in Muizenberg on October 28 and 29. Tickets available on Quicket or at the gate, R40 a person and R15 for children 12 years or younger. Visit capementalhealth.co.za. Even at this unfavourable [dry] season: Nic Bladen is well known for his botanical sculptures, which demonstrate a technique he pioneered of casting plants in bronze and sterling silver. The title of the exhibition is attributed to William Burchell’s reference to the floral abundance and diversity he encountered, even during a severe drought. Details: At Circa Gallery in Johannesburg until October 28. Admission is free. Visit everard-read.co.za/exhibition/29/exhibition_works/770 Kgolo — Tlola Pitsa: This fictional Setswana story revolves around a rebellious young man who chooses to abandon the call to lead his clan. Get a glimpse into a rich tapestry of Batswana culture that will allow you to stare deep into their taboos, theories, myths, faiths and convictions. Details: The musical play is currently on at the State Theatre in Pretoria Central until October 29. Tickets ranging from R55 to R110. Visit statetheatre.co.za/Home/userid/8/kgolo-14233 Sixty + Counts: In celebration of the International Day of Older Persons (October 1), Ikamva Labantu has been hosting an exhibition of photographic portraits of older people residing in Cape Town’s township communities. The organisation works extensively on addressing the needs of older persons through 19 seniors clubs and home-based care services. Details: The exhibition is open until October 29 at the Alliance Française in Cape Town. Admission is free. Visit ikamva.org.za/news/sixty-counts-event-puts-treatment-elderly-spotlight/ Louis Moholo & Friends: The Soweto Jazz Explosion series seeks to bring musicians together in the name of expanding the music platform within Soweto. The first of this exciting new series, sees the Jazz Giant that is Louis Moholo; taking to the stage accompanied by friends including the esteemed likes of Soweto’s very own Khaya Mahlangu, Thebe Lipere & the youthful Mandla Mlangeni. Come experience the magic first hand, for yourself Sunday October 29th, with discounted entry fee for music appreciators under the age of 23. Details: entry fee ranges from R60 - R100 at the Cape Gate Miagi Centre on the Morris Issacs on the high school premises a 5635 Mtembu street, Jabavu, Soweto from 14:30. 