The Sanlam Handmade Contemporary Fair. Be blown away by innovative design, food, wine and all things “well made in Africa”.
This year, the fair will feature a total of 120 exhibitors including designers, chefs and vignerons ready to share their products and stories await you. Details: On the rooftop of Hyde Park Corner shopping centre in Johannesburg from October 13 to 15. For ticket info, visit sanlamhmc.co.za Marlene Steyn: Knot I : I Knot. This is the artist’s second solo exhibition with SMAC Gallery — her first in Johannesburg. The title is a play on Not I, a monologue written in 1972 by Samuel Beckett, in which a disembodied mouth utters jumbled sentences at a ferocious pace. This separation of self is seen in Steyn’s paintings and ceramic sculptures, punctuated by dismembered body parts in bright pastels — often marking fragments of the human form and alluding to philosophical ideas of divisions between the body and mind. Details: The exhibition is on at SMAC Gallery, 19 Keyes Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg until November 11. Visit facebook.com/events/536097343408264/  Fully Automated Luxury Influencer. This is a 180-minute film immersive experience created by the Cuss Group. The film, which will be presented in a multiple-screen installation, is made up of three chapters. The event will include live music, DJ sets and performances aimed at transporting the visual and sonic narrative of the film into real life. Artists include Jamal Nxedlana, Ravi Govender, Christopher McMichael, Zamani Xolo, Lex Trickett, Waldo Alexander, Mandisi Msingaphantsi, thegooddokta, Langa Mavuso, Agord Lean and FAKA. Details: From October 11 to 14 at the Centre for the Less Good Idea at Arts on Main, 264 Fox Street, and Berea Road, Maboneng, Johannesburg.  Kalk Bay Gindig. Set in the Olympia Bakery that was once a cinema — Kalk Bay Gindig was established to celebrate a few local distilleries. Spend the afternoon tasting gin, nibbling on baked goods and jamming to music to complete the experience. Details: The shindig will take place on October 15 at 134 Main Road, Kalk Bay. For ticket info, visit their Facebook page.