Future South Africa welcomes the statement from McKinsey (McKinsey admits to ‘several errors of judgement’ in Eskom deal) acknowledging their role in the malfeasance at Eskom. Unfortunately, it comes a little too late. McKinsey has finally reached conclusions that South Africans came to a few months ago without the benefit of internal information, but through compelling evidence by whistle-blowers, the media and civil society.
 Despite its internal report which tries to justify its involvement in the Eskom saga as legitimate, in the eyes of South Africans, the company still stands accused of criminal complicity in the capture of our state by powerful business interests colluding with prominent political leaders and public sector officials.   We reiterate the views of Corruption Watch that there should be an independent investigation into the matter, and that McKinsey should cooperate with the investigation. It should also proactively cooperate with the parliamentary inquiry into Eskom, and not wait to be summoned.  We call on McKinsey to submit a complaint under the Prevention and Combatting of Corrupt Activities Act in respect of the activities of its erstwhile director, Vikas Sagar. McKinsey must help authorities investigate the conduct of its employees or former employees on the ESKOM contract. It’s not for McKinsey to tell South Africa that nothing unlawful happened. It’s for the authorities to do so.  Aside from the allegedly corrupt manner in which McKinsey secured its engagement with Eskom, the South African public remains outraged at the unconscionable fee of R1.6 billion that McKinsey has levied for a six-month contract. McKinsey must proactively act to return Eskom monies to the fiscus and not merely wait for court action.   We reiterate that civil society organisations will not rest until members of the business community demonstrably act to combat corruption in South Africa, and are prepared to be accountable for actions they may have taken resulting in the capture of state owned entities.  Issued by Future South Africa