When it comes to festivals, I am generally a gluttonous human being, making elaborate maps of just how many sessions I can cram in, only to find that FOMO (fear of missing out) has a double agenda: to push you to see more, and to keep you plonked to your seat until the session you are tuned into is done. If the programming is tight, and you know exactly what you’re missing when, the FOMO is that much easier to deal with. My experience of the first day of the Nirox Words Festival was that the programme became irrelevant the moment the clock struck 11.30am and I was still staring at an empty amphitheatre with the expectation of watching Madala Kunene and Lamakhosi Kunene (set down for 10.30am) quickly fading away.  [Madala Kunene. (Henry Engelbrecht)] When Lamakhosi eventually took to the stage, probably after midday, it was not with Madala Kunene, but a group of musicians who played stripped-down music with bare humanist lyrics about interfamily relations.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.