On Wednesday under-fire Spaniard Gerard Piqué expressed his pride about playing for his national team — insisting he would continue with Spain, despite his outspoken defence of Sunday’s referendum in Catalonia. “It is not incongruous,” said Piqué of his intention to carry on. “I take it to the extreme.
I believe that a person wanting independence could play in the Spanish team because there is no Catalan team, and because that person has nothing against Spain.” Piqué, who was jeered by onlookers during Spain’s open training on Monday, added: “Why could a person wanting independence not play for the Spanish team?” The Barcelona central defender cast his vote in the referendum, which was scarred by ugly clashes between voters and security forces. Despite playing a crucial part of the Spain sides that won the 2010 World Cup and Euro 2012, Piqué is routinely jeered when representing his country. He has already stated his intent to retire from international football after the World Cup, but insisted he could step aside sooner if Spain coach Julen Lopetegui or the federation have a problem with his politics. “It is best to continue and accept this challenge of trying to reverse [the criticism],” Piqué said this week after deciding not to turn his back on Spain. “I feel very proud to be in the Spanish team … It’s impossible to question my commitment. I’ve been here [in the national set-up] since the age of 15 and consider it as family.” Piqué went on to ask for understanding of his political views. “We are players, but above all we are humans,” he said. “Humans have opinions and opinions come from our environment, where we live and through the information we get. It’s not possible for us all to think alike,” he said. “I think that through dialogue and respect we always get to the right place.” Piqué added that he spoke to teammates “who think differently from me. In the end we came to the conclusion that there are things that could be worked out, but that’s not for us to do, we’re footballers.” “Spain has two options — and when I say Spain I’m talking about the government and not the people — sitting down and engaging in dialogue or this son gets up and leaves.” Asked directly whether he supported Catalonian independence, he said: “Players are global figures, I can’t lean to one side or the other.” He added that the hypothetical choice between playing for Spain or a Catalonia side was not on his radar. “It’s a scenario that I haven’t even considered,” he said. Piqué managed to get a laugh out of the journalists by saying he had missed Tuesday’s speech by King Felipe, who accused Catalan leaders of threatening Spain’s stability, because he had been playing cards with his teammates. Spain play Albania in Group G of European qualifying on Friday October 6 and Israel three days later, with one win from these final two games likely to be enough to qualify automatically for next year’s World Cup thanks to their superior goal difference over second-placed Italy. — AFP