Published originally by Alfred A Knopf in September 1987, Toni Morrison’s masterpiece Beloved is a deeply moving, multilayered epic in which her extraordinary excavation of the bones and ghosts of American history (slavery, lynching, Jim Crow segregation) is both a labour of love and an act of witnessing, a monument to the indomitability and imperishability of the human spirit. The novel is an elegant, eloquent encapsulation of antebellum and postbellum America, in which Morrison problematises ideas about memory and forgetting, history and trauma.  The novel takes its subtext from “A Visit to the Slave Mother who Killed Her Child,” a newspaper article published in 1856 and subsequently reproduced in The Black Book, a miscellaneous compilation of black history and culture, which was edited by Morrison in 1974. Sethe, the extraordinary heroine of Beloved, is inspired by Margaret Garner, the enslaved woman whose resistance to being recaptured by the slave catchers and United States marshals after she had escaped Kentucky with her family across a frozen Ohio River to the free state of Ohio in January 1856 led to her desperate act of infanticide.
 
This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.