Spirit, a short-run art show at the Kalashnikovv Gallery in Braamfontein, Johannesburg, is a sometimes unsettling — sometimes grotesque — often touching collaboration between Antonia Steyn and Gill Rall. Steyn is a Cape Town photographer who specialises in portraiture; Rall is a diesel mechanic from Edenvale, an artisan and a fetishist. Rall styles himself as South Africa’s only legitimate “rubber doll”, part of a global community of people who take pleasure in dressing in spectacular, handmade full body latex suits, often designed to look like idealised women. But Spirit is not just a show about one man’s attachment to latex. It’s about identity, whiteness, masculinity and ageing, all written on skin: both through Rall’s physical body (he is 77) and the enticingly tactile latex suits he designs and makes for himself when he dresses as Spirit, his rubber alter ego. The exhibition itself is stark and mostly empty. 
               
	This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. 
	Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. 
	Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. 
	Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. 
	How does the content embargo system work?
	As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into:  
	How much does a subscription cost?
	Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. 
	How do I share embargoed content on social media?
	Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.